THE HOBBIT

OR

THERE AND BACK
AGAIN

J.R.R. TOLKIEN

Chapter I

AN UNEXPECTED PARTY

In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet
hole, filled with the ends of worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry,
bare, sandy hole with nothing in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a
hobbit-hole, and that means comfort.

It had a perfectly round door like a porthole, painted green, with a
shiny yellow brass knob in the exact middle. The door opened on to a
tube-shaped hall like a tunnel: a very comfortable tunnel without
smoke, with panelled walls, and floors tiled and carpeted, provided
with polished chairs, and lots and lots of pegs for hats and coats —
the hobbit was fond of visitors. The tunnel wound on and on, going
fairly but not quite straight into the side of the hill — The Hill, as
all the people for many miles round called it — and many little round
doors opened out of it, first on one side and then on another. No
going upstairs for the hobbit: bedrooms, bathrooms, cellars, pantries
(lots of these), wardrobes (he had whole rooms devoted to clothes),
kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same floor, and indeed on the
same passage. The best rooms were all on the left-hand side (going
in), for these were the only ones to have windows, deep-set round
windows looking over his garden, and meadows beyond, sloping down to
the river.

This hobbit was a very well-to-do hobbit,
and his name was Baggins. The Bagginses
had lived in the neighbourhood of The Hill for
time out of mind, and people considered them
very respectable, not only because most of
them were rich, but also because they never
had any adventures or did anything unexpected:
you could tell what a Baggins would say on any
question without the bother of asking him. This
is a story of how a Baggins had an adventure,
and found himself doing and saying things
altogether unexpected. He may have lost the
neighbours’ respect, but he gained — well, you
will see whether he gained anything in the end.

The mother of our particular hobbit — what is a hobbit? I suppose
hobbits need some description nowadays, since they have become rare
and shy of the Big People, as they call us. They are (or were) a
little people, about half our height, and smaller than the bearded
Dwarves. Hobbits have no beards. There is little or no magic about
them, except the ordinary everyday sort which helps them to disappear
quietly and quickly when large stupid folk like you and me come
blundering along, making a noise like elephants which they can hear a
mile off. They are inclined to be fat in the stomach; they dress in
bright colours (chiefly green and yellow); wear no shoes, because
their feet grow natural leathery soles and thick warm brown hair like
the stuff on their heads (which is curly); have long clever brown
fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs (especially
after dinner, which they have twice a day when they can get it). Now
you know enough to go on with. As I was saying, the mother of this
hobbit — of Bilbo Baggins, that is — was the famous Belladonna Took,
one of the three remarkable daughters of the Old Took, head of the
hobbits who lived across The Water, the small river that ran at the
foot of The Hill. It was often said (in other families) that long ago
one of the Took ancestors must have taken a fairy wife. That was, of
course, absurd, but certainly there was still something not entirely
hobbitlike about them, and once in a while members of the Took-clan
would go and have adventures. They discreetly disappeared, and the
family hushed it up; but the fact remained that the Tooks were not as
respectable as the Bagginses, though they were undoubtedly richer.

Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventures after she became
Mrs. Bungo Baggins. Bungo, that was Bilbo’s father, built the most
luxurious hobbit-hole for her (and partly with her money) that was to
be found either under The Hill or over The Hill or across The Water,
and there they remained to the end of their days. Still it is probable
that Bilbo, her only son, although he looked and behaved exactly like
a second edition of his solid and comfortable father, got something a
bit queer in his make-up from the Took side, something that only
waited for a chance to come out. The chance never arrived, until Bilbo
Baggins was grown up, being about fifty years old or so, and living in
the beautiful hobbit-hole built by his father, which I have just
described for you, until he had in fact apparently settled down
immovably.

By some curious chance one morning long
ago in the quiet of the world, when there was
less noise and more green, and the hobbits
were still numerous and prosperous, and Bilbo
Baggins was standing at his door after
breakfast smoking an enormous long wooden
pipe that reached nearly down to his woolly toes
(neatly brushed) — Gandalf came by. Gandalf! If
you had heard only a quarter of what I have
heard about him, and I have only heard very little

of all there is to hear, you would be prepared for
any sort of remarkable tale. Tales and
adventures sprouted up all over the place
wherever he went, in the most extraordinary
fashion. He had not been down that way under
The Hill for ages and ages, not since his friend
the Old Took died, in fact, and the hobbits had
almost forgotten what he looked like. He had
been away over The Hill and across The Water
on businesses of his own since they were all
small hobbit-boys and hobbit-girls.

All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that
morning was an old man with a staff. He had a
tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, a silver
scarf over which his long white beard hung
down below his waist, and immense black
boots.

“Good Morning!” said Bilbo, and he meant
it. The sun was shining, and the grass was very
green. But Gandalf looked at him from under
long bushy eyebrows that stuck out further than
the brim of his shady hat.

“What do you mean?” he said. “Do you wish
me a good morning, or mean that it is a good
morning whether I want it or not; or that you feel
good this morning; or that it is a morning to be
good on?”

“All of them at once,” said Bilbo. “And a very
fine morning for a pipe of tobacco out of doors,

into the bargain. If you have a pipe about you,
sit down and have a fill of mine! There’s no
hurry, we have all the day before us!” Then Bilbo
sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his
legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring of
smoke that sailed up into the air without
breaking and floated away over The Hill.

“Very pretty!” said Gandalf. “But I have no
time to blow smoke-rings this morning. I am
looking for someone to share in an adventure
that I am arranging, and it’s very difficult to find
anyone.”

“I should think so — in these parts! We are
plain quiet folk and have no use for adventures.
Nasty disturbing uncomfortable things! Make
you late for dinner! I can’t think what anybody
sees in them,” said our Mr. Baggins, and stuck
one thumb behind his braces, and blew out
another even bigger smoke-ring. Then he took
out his morning letters, and began to read,
pretending to take no more notice of the old
man. He had decided that he was not quite his
sort, and wanted him to go away. But the old
man did not move. He stood leaning on his
stick and gazing at the hobbit without saying
anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and
even a little cross.

“Good morning!” he said at last. “We don’t
want any adventures here, thank you! You might

try over The Hill or across The Water.” By this
he meant that the conversation was at an end.

“What a lot of things you do use Good
morning for!” said Gandalf. “Now you mean that
you want to get rid of me, and that it won’t be
good till I move off.”

“Not at all, not at all, my dear sir! Let me
see, I don’t think I know your name?”

“Yes, yes, my dear sir — and I do know your
name, Mr. Bilbo Baggins. And you do know my
name, though you don’t remember that I belong
to it. I am Gandalf, and Gandalf means me! To
think that I should have lived to be good-
morninged by Belladonna Took’s son, as if I
was selling buttons at the door!”

“Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not
the wandering wizard that gave Old Took a pair
of magic diamond studs that fastened
themselves and never came undone till
ordered? Not the fellow who used to tell such
wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and
goblins and giants and the rescue of
princesses and the unexpected luck of widows’
sons? Not the man that used to make such
particularly excellent fireworks! I remember
those! Old Took used to have them on
Midsummer’s Eve. Splendid! They used to go
up like great lilies and snapdragons and
laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all

evening!” You will notice already that Mr.
Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to
believe, also that he was very fond of flowers.
‘‘Dear me!” he went on. “Not the Gandalf who
was responsible for so many quiet lads and
lasses going off into the Blue for mad
adventures? Anything from climbing trees to
visiting elves — or sailing in ships, sailing to
other shores! Bless me, life used to be quite
inter — I mean, you used to upset things badly in
these parts once upon a time. I beg your
pardon, but I had no idea you were still in
business.”

“Where else should I be?” said the wizard.
“All the same I am pleased to find you
remember something about me. You seem to
remember my fireworks kindly, at any rate, and
that is not without hope. Indeed for your old
grandfather look’s sake, and for the sake of
poor Belladonna, I will give you what you asked
for.”

“I beg your pardon, I haven’t asked for
anything!”

“Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I
give it you. In fact I will go so far as to send you
on this adventure. Very amusing for me, very
good for you — and profitable too, very likely, if
you ever get over it.”

“Sorry! I don’t want any adventures, thank

you. Not today. Good morning! But please
come to tea — any time you like! Why not
tomorrow? Come tomorrow! Good bye!” With
that the hobbit turned and scuttled inside his
round green door, and shut it as quickly as he
dared, not to seem rude. Wizards after all are
wizards.

“What on earth did I ask him to tea for!” he
said to himself, as he went to the pantry. He had
only just had breakfast, but he thought a cake or
two and a drink of something would do him
good after his fright.

Gandalf in the meantime was still standing
outside the door, and laughing long but quietly.
After a while he stepped up, and with the spike
on his staff scratched a queer sign on the
hobbit’s beautiful green front-door. Then he
strode away, just about the time when Bilbo
was finishing his second cake and beginning to
think that he had escaped adventures very well.

The next day he had almost forgotten about
Gandalf. He did not remember things very well,
unless he put them down on his Engagement
Tablet: like this: Gandalf Tea Wednesday.
Yesterday he had been too flustered to do
anything of the kind.

Just before tea-time there came a
tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and then
he remembered! He rushed and put on the

kettle, and put out another cup and saucer, and
an extra cake or two, and ran to the door.

“I am so sorry to keep you waiting!” he was
going to say, when he saw that it was not
Gandalf at all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard
tucked into a golden belt, and very bright eyes
under his dark-green hood. As soon as the
door was opened, he pushed inside, just as if
he had been expected.

He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest
peg, and “Dwalin at your service!” he said with
a low bow.

“Bilbo Baggins at yours!” said the hobbit,
too surprised to ask any questions for the
moment. When the silence that followed had
become uncomfortable, he added: “I am just
about to take tea; pray come and have some
with me.” A little stiff perhaps, but he meant it
kindly. And what would you do, if an uninvited
dwarf came and hung his things up in your hall
without a word of explanation?

They had not been at table long, in fact they
had hardly reached the third cake, when there
came another even louder ring at the bell.

"Excuse me!” said the hobbit, and off he
went to the door.

“So you have got here at last!” That was
what he was going to say to Gandalf this time.
But it was not Gandalf. Instead there was a very

old-looking dwarf on the step with a white beard
and a scarlet hood; and he too hopped inside
as soon as the door was open, just as if he had
been invited.

“I see they have begun to arrive already,” he
said when he caught sight of Dwalin’s green
hood hanging up. He hung his red one next to it,
and “Balin at your service!” he said with his
hand on his breast.

“Thank you!” said Bilbo with a gasp. It was
not the correct thing to say, but they have
begun to arrive had flustered him badly. He
liked visitors, but he liked to know them before
they arrived, and he preferred to ask them
himself. He had a horrible thought that the
cakes might run short, and then he — as the
host: he knew his duty and stuck to it however
painful — he might have to go without.

“Come along in, and have some tea!” he
managed to say after taking a deep breath.

“A little beer would suit me better, if it is all
the same to you, my good sir,” said Balin with
the white beard. “But I don’t mind some cake —
seed-cake, if you have any.”

“Lots!” Bilbo found himself answering, to his
own surprise; and he found himself scuttling off,
too, to the cellar to fill a pint beer-mug, and then
to a pantry to fetch two beautiful round seed-

cakes which he had baked that afternoon for his
after-supper morsel.

When he got back Balin and Dwalin were
talking at the table like old friends (as a matter
of fact they were brothers). Bilbo plumped down
the beer and the cake in front of them, when
loud came a ring at the bell again, and then
another ring.

“Gandalf for certain this time,” he thought as
he puffed along the passage. But it was not. It
was two more dwarves, both with blue hoods,
silver belts, and yellow beards; and each of
them carried a bag of tools and a spade. In they
hopped, as soon as the door began to open —
Bilbo was hardly surprised at all.

“What can I do for you, my dwarves?” he
said.

“Kili at your service!” said the one. “And
Fili!” added the other; and they both swept off
their blue hoods and bowed.

“At yours and your family’s!” replied Bilbo,
remembering his manners this time.

“Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,” said
Kili. “Let us join the throng!”

“Throng!” thought Mr. Baggins. “I don’t like
the sound of that. I really must sit down for a
minute and collect my wits, and have a drink.”
He had only just had a sip — in the corner, while
the four dwarves sat round the table, and talked
about mines and gold and troubles with the
goblins, and the depredations of dragons, and
lots of other things which he did not understand,
and did not want to, for they sounded much too
adventurous — when, ding-dong-a-ling-dang,
his bell rang again, as if some naughty little
hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle off.

“Someone at the door!” he said, blinking.

“Some four, I should say by the sound,” said
Fili. “Besides, we saw them coming along
behind us in the distance.”

The poor little hobbit sat down in the hall
and put his head in his hands, and wondered
what had happened, and what was going to
happen, and whether they would all stay to
supper. Then the bell rang again louder than
ever, and he had to run to the door. It was not
four after all, it was five. Another dwarf had
come along while he was wondering in the hall.
He had hardly turned the knob, before they were
all inside, bowing and saying “at your service”
one after another. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, and Gloin
were their names; and very soon two purple
hoods, a grey hood, a brown hood, and a white
hood were hanging on the pegs, and off they
marched with their broad hands stuck in their
gold and silver belts to join the others. Already it
had almost become a throng. Some called for
ale, and some for porter, and one for coffee,
and all of them for cakes; so the hobbit was
kept very busy for a while.

A big jug of coffee had just been set in the
hearth, the seed-cakes were gone, and the
dwarves were starting on a round of buttered
scones, when there came — a loud knock. Not a
ring, but a hard rat-tat on the hobbit’s beautiful
green door. Somebody was banging with a
stick!

Bilbo rushed along the passage, very angry,
and altogether bewildered and bewuthered —
this was the most awkward Wednesday he ever
remembered. He pulled open the door with a
jerk, and they all fell in, one on top of the other.
More dwarves, four more! And there was
Gandalf behind, leaning on his staff and
laughing. He had made quite a dent on the
beautiful door; he had also, by the way,
knocked out the secret mark that he had put
there the morning before.

“Carefully! Carefully!” he said. “It is not like
you, Bilbo, to keep friends waiting on the mat,
and then open the door like a pop-gun! Let me
introduce Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and especially
Thorin!”

“At your service!” said Bifur, Bofur, and
Bombur standing in a row. Then they hung up
two yellow hoods and a pale green one; and
also a sky-blue one with a long silver tassel.

This last belonged to Thorin, an enormously
important dwarf, in fact no other than the great
Thorin Oakenshield himself, who was not at all
pleased at falling flat on Bilbo’s mat with Bifur,
Bofur, and Bombur on top of him. For one thing
Bombur was immensely fat and heavy. Thorin
indeed was very haughty, and said nothing
about service', but poor Mr. Baggins said he
was sorry so many times, that at last he grunted
“pray don’t mention it,” and stopped frowning.

“Now we are all here!” said Gandalf, looking
at the row of thirteen hoods — the best
detachable party hoods — and his own hat
hanging on the pegs. “Quite a merry gathering! I
hope there is something left for the late-comers
to eat and drink! What’s that? Tea! No thank
you! A little red wine, I think for me.”

“And for me,” said Thorin.

“And raspberry jam and apple-tart,” said
Bifur.

“And mince-pies and cheese,” said Bofur.

“And pork-pie and salad,” said Bombur.

“And more cakes — and ale — and coffee, if
you don’t mind,” called the other dwarves
through the door.

“Put on a few eggs, there’s a good fellow!”
Gandalf called after him, as the hobbit stumped
off to the pantries. “And just bring out the cold
chicken and pickles!”

“Seems to know as much about the inside
of my larders as I do myself!” thought Mr.
Baggins, who was feeling positively flummoxed,
and was beginning to wonder whether a most
wretched adventure had not come right into his
house. By the time he had got all the bottles and
dishes and knives and forks and glasses and
plates and spoons and things piled up on big
trays, he was getting very hot, and red in the
face, and annoyed.

“Confusticate and bebother these
dwarves!” he said aloud. “Why don’t they come
and lend a hand?” Lo and behold! there stood
Balin and Dwalin at the door of the kitchen, and
Fili and Kili behind them, and before he could
say knife they had whisked the trays and a
couple of small tables into the parlour and set
out everything afresh.

Gandalf sat at the head of the party with the
thirteen dwarves all round: and Bilbo sat on a
stool at the fireside, nibbling at a biscuit (his
appetite was quite taken away), and trying to
look as if this was all perfectly ordinary and not
in the least an adventure. The dwarves ate and
ate, and talked and talked, and time got on. At
last they pushed their chairs back, and Bilbo
made a move to collect the plates and glasses.

“I suppose you will all stay to supper?” he
said in his politest unpressing tones.

“Of course!” said Thorin. “And after. We
shan’t get through the business till late, and we
must have some music first. Now to clear up!”

Thereupon the twelve dwarves — not Thorin,
he was too important, and stayed talking to
Gandalf — jumped to their feet, and made tall
piles of all the things. Off they went, not waiting
for trays, balancing columns of plates, each with
a bottle on the top, with one hand, while the
hobbit ran after them almost squeaking with
fright: “please be careful!” and “please, don’t
trouble! I can manage.” But the dwarves only
started to sing:

Chip the glasses and crack the plates!

Blunt the knives and bend the forks!
That’s i/i hat Bilbo Baggins hates-
Smash the bottles and burn the corks!

Cut the cloth and tread on the fat!

Pour the milk on the pantry floor!
Leave the bones on the bedroom mat!
Splash the 1/1 ine on every door!

Dump the crocks in a boiling bow/;

Pound them up with a thumping pole;
And when you’ve finished, if any are
whole,

Send them down the hall to roll!

That’s what Bilbo Baggins hates!

So, carefully! carefully with the plates!

And of course they did none of these
dreadful things, and everything was cleaned
and put away safe as quick as lightning, while
the hobbit was turning round and round in the
middle of the kitchen trying to see what they
were doing. Then they went back, and found
Thorin with his feet on the fender smoking a
pipe. He was blowing the most enormous
smoke-rings, and wherever he told one to go, it
went — up the chimney, or behind the clock on
the mantelpiece, or under the table, or round
and round the ceiling; but wherever it went it
was not quick enough to escape Gandalf. Pop!
he sent a smaller smoke-ring from his short
clay-pipe straight through each one of Thorin’s.

Then Gandalfs smoke-ring would go green and
come back to hover over the wizard’s head. He
had a cloud of them about him already, and in
the dim light it made him look strange and
sorcerous. Bilbo stood still and watched — he
loved smoke-rings — and then he blushed to
think how proud he had been yesterday
morning of the smoke-rings he had sent up the
wind over The Hill.

"Now for some music!” said Thorin. “Bring
out the instruments!”

Kili and Fili rushed for their bags and
brought back little fiddles; Dori, Nori, and Ori
brought out flutes from somewhere inside their
coats; Bombur produced a drum from the hall;
Bifur and Bofur went out too, and came back
with clarinets that they had left among the
walking-sticks. Dwalin and Balin said: “Excuse
me, I left mine in the porch!” “Just bring mine in
with you!” said Thorin. They came back with
viols as big as themselves, and with Thorin’s
harp wrapped in a green cloth. It was a beautiful
golden harp, and when Thorin struck it the
music began all at once, so sudden and sweet
that Bilbo forgot everything else, and was swept
away into dark lands under strange moons, far
over The Water and very far from his hobbit-
hole under The Hill.

The dark came into the room from the little

window that opened in the side of The Hill; the
firelight flickered — it was April — and still they
played on, while the shadow of Gandalf s beard
wagged against the wall.

The dark filled all the room, and the fire died
down, and the shadows were lost, and still they
played on. And suddenly first one and then
another began to sing as they played, deep-
throated singing of the dwarves in the deep
places of their ancient homes; and this is like a
fragment of their song, if it can be like their
song without their music.

Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away ere break of day
To seek the pale enchanted gold.

The dwarves of yore made mighty spells,
While hammers fell like ringing bells
In places deep, where dark things sleep,
In hollowhalls beneath the fells.

For ancient king and elvish lord
There many a gleaming golden hoard
They shaped and wrought, and light they
caught

To hide in gems on hilt of sward.

On silver necklaces they strung

The flowering stars, on crowns they hung

The dragon-fire, in twisted wire

They meshed the light of moon and sun.

Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,

To claim our long-forgotten gold.

Goblets they carved there for themselves
And harps of gold; where no man delves
There lay they long, and many a song
Was sung unheard by men or elves.

The pines were roaring on the height,

The winds were moaning in the night.
The fire ms red, it flaming spread;

The trees like torches blazed with light.

The bells were ringing in the dale
And men looked up with faces pale;
The dragon's ire more fierce than fire
Laid lowtheir towers and houses frail.

The mountain smoked beneath the
moon;

The dmrves, they heard the tramp of
doom.

They fled their hall to dying fall
Beneath his feet, beneath the moon.

Far over the misty mountains grim
To dungeons deep and caverns dim
We must amy, ere break of day,

To win our harps and gold from him!

As they sang the hobbit felt the love of
beautiful things made by hands and by cunning
and by magic moving through him, a fierce and
a jealous love, the desire of the hearts of
dwarves. Then something Tookish woke up
inside him, and he wished to go and see the
great mountains, and hear the pine-trees and
the waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear
a sword instead of a walking-stick. He looked
out of the window. The stars were out in a dark
sky above the trees. He thought of the jewels of
the dwarves shining in dark caverns. Suddenly
in the wood beyond The Water a flame leapt up
— probably somebody lighting a wood-fire —
and he thought of plundering dragons settling
on his quiet Hill and kindling it all to flames. He
shuddered; and very quickly he was plain Mr.
Baggins of Bag-End, Under-Hill, again.

He got up trembling. He had less than half a
mind to fetch the lamp, and more than half a
mind to pretend to, and go and hide behind the
beer-barrels in the cellar, and not come out
again until all the dwarves had gone away.
Suddenly he found that the music and the
singing had stopped, and they were all looking
at him with eyes shining in the dark.

“Where are you going?” said Thorin, in a
tone that seemed to show that he guessed both

halves of the hobbit’s mind.

“What about a little light?” said Bilbo
apologetically.

“We like the dark,” said all the dwarves.
“Dark for dark business! There are many hours
before dawn.”

“Of course!” said Bilbo, and sat down in a
hurry. He missed the stool and sat in the fender,
knocking over the poker and shovel with a
crash.

“Hush!” said Gandalf. “Let Thorin speak!”
And this is how Thorin began.

“Gandalf, dwarves and Mr. Baggins! We
are met together in the house of our friend and
fellow conspirator, this most excellent and
audacious hobbit — may the hair on his toes
never fall out! all praise to his wine and ale! — ”
He paused for breath and for a polite remark
from the hobbit, but the compliments were quite
lost on poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging
his mouth in protest at being called audacious
and worst of all fellow conspirator, though no
noise came out, he was so flummoxed. So
Thorin went on:

“We are met to discuss our plans, our ways,
means, policy and devices. We shall soon
before the break of day start on our long
journey, a journey from which some of us, or
perhaps all of us (except our friend and
counsellor, the ingenious wizard Gandalf) may
never return. It is a solemn moment. Our object
is, I take it, well known to us all. To the
estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps to one or
two of the younger dwarves (I think I should be
right in naming Kili and Fili, for instance), the
exact situation at the moment may require a
little brief explanation — ”

This was Thorin’s style. He was an
important dwarf. If he had been allowed, he
would probably have gone on like this until he
was out of breath, without telling any one there
anything that was not known already. But he
was rudely interrupted. Poor Bilbo couldn’t bear
it any longer. At may never return he began to
feel a shriek coming up inside, and very soon it
burst out like the whistle of an engine coming
out of a tunnel. All the dwarves sprang up,
knocking over the table. Gandalf struck a blue
light on the end of his magic staff, and in its
firework glare the poor little hobbit could be
seen kneeling on the hearth-rug, shaking like a
jelly that was melting. Then he fell flat on the
floor, and kept on calling out “struck by lightning,
struck by lightning!” over and over again; and
that was all they could get out of him for a long
time. So they took him and laid him out of the
way on the drawing-room sofa with a drink at
his elbow, and they went back to their dark
business.

“Excitable little fellow,” said Gandalf, as they
sat down again. “Gets funny queer fits, but he is
one of the best, one of the best — as fierce as a
dragon in a pinch.”

If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch,
you will realize that this was only poetical
exaggeration applied to any hobbit, even to Old
Took’s great-grand-uncle Bullroarer, who was
so huge (for a hobbit) that he could ride a
horse. He charged the ranks of the goblins of
Mount Gram in the Battle of the Green Fields,
and knocked their king Golfimbul’s head clean
off with a wooden club. It sailed a hundred yards
through the air and went down a rabbit-hole,
and in this way the battle was won and the
game of Golf invented at the same moment.

In the meanwhile, however, Bullroarer’s
gentler descendant was reviving in the drawing-
room. After a while and a drink he crept
nervously to the door of the parlour. This is what
he heard, Gloin speaking: “Humph!” (or some
snort more or less like that). “Will he do, do you
think? It is all very well for Gandalf to talk about
this hobbit being fierce, but one shriek like that
in a moment of excitement would be enough to
wake the dragon and all his relatives, and kill
the lot of us. I think it sounded more like fright
than excitement! In fact, if it had not been for the
sign on the door, I should have been sure we
had come to the wrong house. As soon as I
clapped eyes on the little fellow bobbing and
puffing on the mat, I had my doubts. He looks
more like a grocer than a burglar!”

Then Mr. Baggins turned the handle and
went in. The Took side had won. He suddenly
felt he would go without bed and breakfast to be
thought fierce. As for little fellowbobbing on the
mat it almost made him really fierce. Many a
time afterwards the Baggins part regretted what
he did now, and he said to himself: “Bilbo, you
were a fool; you walked right in and put your
foot in it.”

“Pardon me,” he said, “if I have overheard
words that you were saying. I don’t pretend to
understand what you are talking about, or your
reference to burglars, but I think I am right in
believing” (this is what he called being on his
dignity) “that you think I am no good. I will show
you. I have no signs on my door — it was painted
a week ago — , and I am quite sure you have
come to the wrong house. As soon as I saw
your funny faces on the door-step, I had my
doubts. But treat it as the right one. Tell me
what you want done, and I will try it, if I have to
walk from here to the East of East and fight the
wild Were-worms in the Last Desert. I had a

great-great-great-grand-uncle once, Bullroarer
Took, and — ”

“Yes, yes, but that was long ago,” said
Gloin. “I was talking about you. And I assure you
there is a mark on this door — the usual one in
the trade, or used to be. Burglar wants a good
job, plenty of Excitement and reasonable
Reward, that’s how it is usually read. You can
say Expert Treasure-hunter instead of Burglar
if you like. Some of them do. It’s all the same to
us. Gandalf told us that there was a man of the
sort in these parts looking for a Job at once,
and that he had arranged for a meeting here
this Wednesday tea-time.”

“Of course there is a mark,” said Gandalf. “I
put it there myself. For very good reasons. You
asked me to find the fourteenth man for your
expedition, and I chose Mr. Baggins. Just let
any one say I chose the wrong man or the
wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and
have all the bad luck you like, or go back to
digging coal.”

He scowled so angrily at Gloin that the
dwarf huddled back in his chair; and when Bilbo
tried to open his mouth to ask a question, he
turned and frowned at him and stuck out his
bushy eyebrows, till Bilbo shut his mouth tight
with a snap. “That’s right,” said Gandalf. “Let’s

have no more argument. I have chosen Mr.
Baggins and that ought to be enough for all of
you. If I say he is a Burglar, a Burglar he is, or
will be when the time comes. There is a lot
more in him than you guess, and a deal more
than he has any idea of himself. You may
(possibly) all live to thank me yet. Now Bilbo, my
boy, fetch the lamp, and let’s have a little light
on this!”

On the table in the light of a big lamp with a
red shade he spread a piece of parchment
rather like a map.

“This was made by Thror, your grandfather,
Thorin,” he said in answer to the dwarves’
excited questions. “It is a plan of the Mountain.”

“I don’t see that this will help us much,” said
Thorin disappointedly after a glance. “I
remember the Mountain well enough and the
lands about it. And I know where Mirkwood is,
and the Withered Heath where the great
dragons bred.”

“There is a dragon marked in red on the
Mountain,” said Balin, “but it will be easy
enough to find him without that, if ever we arrive
there.”

“There is one point that you haven’t
noticed,” said the wizard, “and that is the secret
entrance. You see that rune on the West side,
and the hand pointing to it from the other runes?

That marks a hidden passage to the Lower
Halls.” (Look at the map at the beginning of this
book, and you will see there the runes.)

“It may have been secret once,” said Thorin,
“but how do we know that it is secret any
longer? Old Smaug has lived there long enough
now to find out anything there is to know about
those caves.”

“He may — but he can’t have used it for
years and years.”

“Why?”

“Because it is too small. ' Five feet high the
door and three may walk abreast ’ say the
runes, but Smaug could not creep into a hole
that size, not even when he was a young
dragon, certainly not after devouring so many of
the dwarves and men of Dale.”

“It seems a great big hole to me,” squeaked
Bilbo (who had no experience of dragons and
only of hobbit-holes). He was getting excited
and interested again, so that he forgot to keep
his mouth shut. He loved maps, and in his hall
there hung a large one of the Country Round
with all his favourite walks marked on it in red
ink. “How could such a large door be kept
secret from everybody outside, apart from the
dragon?” he asked. He was only a little hobbit
you must remember.

“In lots of ways,” said Gandalf. “But in what

way this one has been hidden we don’t know
without going to see. From what it says on the
map I should guess there is a closed door
which has been made to look exactly like the
side of the Mountain. That is the usual dwarves’
method — I think that is right, isn’t it?”

“Quite right,” said Thorin.

“Also,” went on Gandalf, “I forgot to mention
that with the map went a key, a small and
curious key. Here it is!” he said, and handed to
Thorin a key with a long barrel and intricate
wards, made of silver. “Keep it safe!”

“Indeed I will,” said Thorin, and he fastened
it upon a fine chain that hung about his neck
and under his jacket. “Now things begin to look
more hopeful. This news alters them much for
the better. So far we have had no clear idea
what to do. We thought of going East, as quiet
and careful as we could, as far as the Long
Lake. After that the trouble would begin — .”

“A long time before that, if I know anything
about the roads East,” interrupted Gandalf.

“We might go from there up along the River
Running,” went on Thorin taking no notice, “and
so to the ruins of Dale — the old town in the
valley there, under the shadow of the Mountain.
But we none of us liked the idea of the Front
Gate. The river runs right out of it through the
great cliff at the South of the Mountain, and out

of it comes the dragon too — far too often,
unless he has changed his habits.”

“That would be no good,” said the wizard,
“not without a mighty Warrior, even a Hero. I
tried to find one; but warriors are busy fighting
one another in distant lands, and in this
neighbourhood heroes are scarce, or simply
not to be found. Swords in these parts are
mostly blunt, and axes are used for trees, and
shields as cradles or dish-covers; and dragons
are comfortably far-off (and therefore
legendary). That is why I settled on burglary—
especially when I remembered the existence of
a Side-door. And here is our little Bilbo
Baggins, the burglar, the chosen and selected
burglar. So now let’s get on and make some
plans.”

“Very well then,” said Thorin, “supposing the
burglar-expert gives us some ideas or
suggestions.” He turned with mock-politeness
to Bilbo.

“First I should like to know a bit more about
things,” said he, feeling all confused and a bit
shaky inside, but so far still Tookishly
determined to go on with things. “I mean about
the gold and the dragon, and all that, and how it
got there, and who it belongs to, and so on and
further.”

“Bless me!” said Thorin, “haven’t you got a

map? and didn’t you hear our song? and
haven’t we been talking about all this for
hours?”

“All the same, I should like it all plain and
clear,” said he obstinately, putting on his
business manner (usually reserved for people
who tried to borrow money off him), and doing
his best to appear wise and prudent and
professional and live up to Gandalfs
recommendation. “Also I should like to know
about risks, out-of-pocket expenses, time
required and remuneration, and so forth” — by
which he meant: “What am I going to get out of
it? and am I going to come back alive?”

“O very well,” said Thorin. “Long ago in my
grandfather Thror’s time our family was driven
out of the far North, and came back with all their
wealth and their tools to this Mountain on the
map. It had been discovered by my far
ancestor, Thrain the Old, but now they mined
and they tunnelled and they made huger halls
and greater workshops — and in addition I
believe they found a good deal of gold and a
great many jewels too. Anyway they grew
immensely rich and famous, and my
grandfather was King under the Mountain
again, and treated with great reverence by the
mortal men, who lived to the South, and were
gradually spreading up the Running River as far

as the valley overshadowed by the Mountain.
They built the merry town of Dale there in those
days. Kings used to send for our smiths, and
reward even the least skillful most richly.
Fathers would beg us to take their sons as
apprentices, and pay us handsomely,
especially in food-supplies, which we never
bothered to grow or find for ourselves.
Altogether those were good days for us, and
the poorest of us had money to spend and to
lend, and leisure to make beautiful things just
for the fun of it, not to speak of the most
marvellous and magical toys, the like of which is
not to be found in the world now-a-days. So my
grandfather’s halls became full of armour and
jewels and carvings and cups, and the toy
market of Dale was the wonder of the North.

“Undoubtedly that was what brought the
dragon. Dragons steal gold and jewels, you
know, from men and elves and dwarves,
wherever they can find them; and they guard
their plunder as long as they live (which is
practically for ever, unless they are killed), and
never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly
know a good bit of work from a bad, though
they usually have a good notion of the current
market value; and they can’t make a thing for
themselves, not even mend a little loose scale
of their armour. There were lots of dragons in

the North in those days, and gold was probably
getting scarce up there, with the dwarves flying
south or getting killed, and all the general waste
and destruction that dragons make going from
bad to worse. There was a most specially
greedy, strong and wicked worm called Smaug.
One day he flew up into the air and came south.
The first we heard of it was a noise like a
hurricane coming from the North, and the pine-
trees on the Mountain creaking and cracking in
the wind. Some of the dwarves who happened
to be outside (I was one luckily — a fine
adventurous lad in those days, always
wandering about, and it saved my life that day)
— well, from a good way off we saw the dragon
settle on our mountain in a spout of flame. Then
he came down the slopes and when he reached
the woods they all went up in fire. By that time
all the bells were ringing in Dale and the
warriors were arming. The dwarves rushed out
of their great gate; but there was the dragon
waiting for them. None escaped that way. The
river rushed up in steam and a fog fell on Dale,
and in the fog the dragon came on them and
destroyed most of the warriors — the usual
unhappy story, it was only too common in those
days. Then he went back and crept in through
the Front Gate and routed out all the halls, and
lanes, and tunnels, alleys, cellars, mansions and

passages. After that there were no dwarves left
alive inside, and he took all their wealth for
himself. Probably, for that is the dragons’ way,
he has piled it all up in a great heap far inside,
and sleeps on it for a bed. Later he used to
crawl out of the great gate and come by night to
Dale, and carry away people, especially
maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all
the people dead or gone. What goes on there
now I don’t know for certain, but I don’t suppose
any one lives nearer to the Mountain than the far
edge of the Long Lake now-a-days.

“The few of us that were well outside sat
and wept in hiding, and cursed Smaug; and
there we were unexpectedly joined by my father
and my grandfather with singed beards. They
looked very grim but they said very little. When I
asked how they had got away, they told me to
hold my tongue, and said that one day in the
proper time I should know. After that we went
away, and we have had to earn our livings as
best we could up and down the lands, often
enough sinking as low as blacksmith-work or
even coalmining. But we have never forgotten
our stolen treasure. And even now, when I will
allow we have a good bit laid by and are not so
badly off’ — here Thorin stroked the gold chain
round his neck — “we still mean to get it back,
and to bring our curses home to Smaug — if we

can.

“I have often wondered about my father’s
and my grandfather’s escape. I see now they
must have had a private Side-door which only
they knew about. But apparently they made a
map, and I should like to know how Gandalf got
hold of it, and why it did not come down to me,
the rightful heir.”

“I did not ‘get hold of it,' I was given it,” said
the wizard. “Your grandfather Thror was killed,
you remember, in the mines of Moria by Azoa
the Goblin .”

“Curse his name, yes,” said Thorin.

“And Thrain your father went away on the
twenty-first of April, a hundred years ago last
Thursday, and has never been seen by you
since — ”

“True, true,” said Thorin.

“Well, your father gave me this to give to
you; and if I have chosen my own time and way
for handing it over, you can hardly blame me,
considering the trouble I had to find you. Your
father could not remember his own name when
he gave me the paper, and he never told me
yours; so on the whole I think I ought to be
praised and thanked! Here it is,” said he
handing the map to Thorin.

“I don’t understand,” said Thorin, and Bilbo
felt he would have liked to say the same. The

explanation did not seem to explain.

“Your grandfather,” said the wizard slowly
and grimly, “gave the map to his son for safety
before he went to the mines of Moria. Your
father went away to try his luck with the map
after your grandfather was killed; and lots of
adventures of a most unpleasant sort he had,
but he never got near the Mountain. How he got
there I don’t know, but I found him a prisoner in
the dungeons of the Necromancer.”

“Whatever were you doing there?” asked
Thorin with a shudder, and all the dwarves
shivered.

"Never you mind. I was finding things out, as
usual; and a nasty dangerous business it was.
Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to
save your father, but it was too late. He was
witless and wandering, and had forgotten
almost everything except the map and the key.”

“We have long ago paid the goblins of
Moria,” said Thorin; “we must give a thought to
the Necromancer.”

“Don’t be absurd! He is an enemy far
beyond the powers of all the dwarves put
together, if they could all be collected again
from the four corners of the world. The one thing
your father wished was for his son to read the
map and use the key. The dragon and the
Mountain are more than big enough tasks for

you!”

“Hear, hear!” said Bilbo, and accidentally
said it aloud.

“Hear what?” they all said turning suddenly
towards him, and he was so flustered that he
answered “Hear what I have got to say!”

“What’s that?” they asked.

“Well, I should say that you ought to go East
and have a look round. After all there is the
Side-door, and dragons must sleep
sometimes, I suppose. If you sit on the door-
step long enough, I daresay you will think of
something. And well, don’t you know, I think we
have talked long enough for one night, if you
see what I mean. What about bed, and an early
start, and all that? I will give you a good
breakfast before you go.”

“Before we go, I suppose you mean,” said
Thorin. “Aren’t you the burglar? And isn’t sitting
on the door-step your job, not to speak of
getting inside the door? But I agree about bed
and breakfast. I like six eggs with my ham,
when starting on a journey: fried not poached,
and mind you don’t break ’em.”

After all the others had ordered their
breakfasts without so much as a please (which
annoyed Bilbo very much), they all got up. The
hobbit had to find room for them all, and filled all
his spare-rooms and made beds on chairs and

sofas, before he got them all stowed and went
to his own little bed very tired and not altogether
happy. One thing he did make his mind up
about was not to bother to get up very early and
cook everybody else’s wretched breakfast. The
Tookishness was wearing off, and he was not
now quite so sure that he was going on any
journey in the morning.

As he lay in bed he could hear Thorin still
humming to himself in the best bedroom next to
him:

Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,

To find our long-forgotten gold.

Bilbo went to sleep with that in his ears, and
it gave him very uncomfortable dreams. It was
long after the break of day, when he woke up.

Chapter II

ROAST MUTTON

Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-
gown went into the dining-room. There he saw
nobody, but all the signs of a large and hurried
breakfast. There was a fearful mess in the
room, and piles of unwashed crocks in the
kitchen. Nearly every pot and pan he
possessed seemed to have been used. The
washing-up was so dismally real that Bilbo was
forced to believe the party of the night before
had not been part of his bad dreams, as he had
rather hoped. Indeed he was really relieved
after all to think that they had all gone without
him, and without bothering to wake him up (“but
with never a thank-you” he thought); and yet in a
way he could not help feeling just a trifle
disappointed. The feeling surprised him.

“Don't be a fool. Bilbo Baggins!” he said to
himself, “thinking of dragons and all that
outlandish nonsense at your age!” So he put on
an apron, lit fires, boiled water, and washed up.
Then he had a nice little breakfast in the kitchen
before turning out the dining-room. By that time
the sun was shining; and the front door was
open, letting in a warm spring breeze. Bilbo
began to whistle loudly and to forget about the
night before. In fact he was just sitting down to a

nice little second breakfast in the dining-room
by the open window, when in walked Gandalf.

“My dear fellow,” said he, “whenever are
you going to come? What about an early start?
— and here you are having breakfast, or
whatever you call it, at half past ten! They left
you the message, because they could not wait.”

“What message?” said poor Mr. Baggins all
in a fluster.

“Great Elephants!” said Gandalf, “you are
not at all yourself this morning — you have never
dusted the mantelpiece!”

“What's that got to do with it? I have had
enough to do with washing up for fourteen!”

“If you had dusted the mantelpiece, you
would have found this just under the clock,” said
Gandalf, handing Bilbo a note (written, of
course, on his own note-paper).

This is what he read:

“Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo
greeting! For your hospitality our sincerest
thanks, and for your offer of professional
assistance our grateful acceptance. Terms:
cash on delivery, up to and not exceeding one
fourteenth of total profits (if any); all travelling
expenses guaranteed in any event; funeral
expenses to be defrayed by us or our
representatives, if occasion arises and the
matter is not otherwise arranged for.

“Thinking it unnecessary to disturb your
esteemed repose, we have proceeded in
advance to make requisite preparations, and
shall await your respected person at the Green

Dragon Inn, Bywater, at 11 a.m. sharp. Trusting
that you will be punctual,

“ We have the honour to remain
“ Yours deeply
“ Thorin &amp; Co.”

“That leaves you just ten minutes. You will
have to run,” said Gandalf.

“But — ,” said Bilbo.

“No time for it,” said the wizard.

“But — ,” said Bilbo again.

“No time for that either! Off you go!”

To the end of his days Bilbo could never
remember how he found himself outside,
without a hat, a walking-stick or any money, or
anything that he usually took when he went out;
leaving his second breakfast half-finished and
quite unwashed-up, pushing his keys into
Gandalf s hands, and running as fast as his furry
feet could carry him down the lane, past the
great Mill, across The Water, and then on for a
mile or more.

Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater
just on the stroke of eleven, and found he had
come without a pocket-handkerchief!

“Bravo!” said Balin who was standing at the
inn door looking out for him.

Just then all the others came round the
corner of the road from the village. They were
on ponies, and each pony was slung about with
all kinds of baggages, packages, parcels, and
paraphernalia. There was a very small pony,
apparently for Bilbo.

“Up you two get, and off we go!” said
Thorin.

“I'm awfully sorry,” said Bilbo, “but I have

come without my hat, and I have left my pocket-
handkerchief behind, and I haven't got any
money. I didn't get your note until after 10.45 to
be precise.”

“Don't be precise,” said Dwalin, “and don't
worry! You will have to manage without pocket-
handkerchiefs, and a good many other things,
before you get to the journey’s end. As for a hat,

I have got a spare hood and cloak in my
luggage.”

That's how they all came to start, jogging off
from the inn one fine morning just before May,
on laden ponies; and Bilbo was wearing a dark-
green hood (a little weather-stained) and a
dark-green cloak borrowed from Dwalin. They
were too large for him, and he looked rather
comic. What his father Bungo would have
thought of him, I daren't think. His only comfort
was he couldn't be mistaken for a dwarf, as he
had no beard.

They had not been riding very long, when up
came Gandalf very splendid on a white horse.
He had brought a lot of pocket-handkerchiefs,
and Bilbo's pipe and tobacco. So after that the
party went along very merrily, and they told
stories or sang songs as they rode forward all
day, except of course when they stopped for
meals. These didn't come quite as often as
Bilbo would have liked them, but still he began
to feel that adventures were not so bad after all.

At first they had passed through hobbit-
lands, a wide respectable country inhabited by
decent folk, with good roads, an inn or two, and
now and then a dwarf or a farmer ambling by on
business. Then they came to lands where

people spoke strangely, and sang songs Bilbo
had never heard before. Now they had gone on
far into the Lone-lands, where there were no
people left, no inns, and the roads grew steadily
worse. Not far ahead were dreary hills, rising
higher and higher, dark with trees. On some of
them were old castles with an evil look, as if
they had been built by wicked people.
Everything seemed gloomy, for the weather that
day had taken a nasty turn. Mostly it had been
as good as May can be, can be, even in merry
tales, but now it was cold and wet. In the Lone-
lands they had been obliged to camp when they
could, but at least it had been dry.

“To think it will soon be June!” grumbled
Bilbo, as he splashed along behind the others
in a very muddy track. It was after tea-time; it
was pouring with rain, and had been all day; his
hood was dripping into his eyes, his cloak was
full of water; the pony was tired and stumbled on
stones; the others were too grumpy to talk. “And
I'm sure the rain has got into the dry clothes and
into the food-bags,” thought Bilbo. “Bother
burgling and everything to do with it! I wish I was
at home in my nice hole by the fire, with the
kettle just beginning to sing!” It was not the last
time that he wished that!

Still the dwarves jogged on, never turning
round or taking any notice of the hobbit.
Somewhere behind the grey clouds the sun
must have gone down, for it began to get dark
as they went down into a deep valley with a river
at the bottom. Wind got up, and willows along
its banks bent and sighed. Fortunately the road
went over an ancient stone bridge, for the river,

swollen with the rains, came rushing down from
the hills and mountains in the north.

It was nearly night when they had crossed
over. The wind broke up the grey clouds, and a
wandering moon appeared above the hills
between the flying rags. Then they stopped, and
Thorin muttered something about supper, “and
where shall we get a dry patch to sleep on?”

Not until then did they notice that Gandalf
was missing. So far he had come all the way
with them, never saying if he was in the
adventure or merely keeping them company for
a while. He had eaten most, talked most, and
laughed most. But now he simply was not there
at all!

“Just when a wizard would have been most
useful, too,” groaned Dori and Nori (who shared
the hobbit's views about regular meals, plenty
and often).

They decided in the end that they would
have to camp where they were. They moved to
a clump of trees, and though it was drier under
them, the wind shook the rain off the leaves,
and the drip, drip, was most annoying. Also the
mischief seemed to have got into the fire.
Dwarves can make a fire almost anywhere out
of almost anything, wind or no wind; but they
could not do it that night, not even Oin and
Gloin, who were specially good at it.

Then one of the ponies took fright at nothing
and bolted. He got into the river before they
could catch him; and before they could get him
out again, Fili and Kili were nearly drowned,

and all the baggage that he carried was
washed away off him. Of course it was mostly
food, and there was mighty little left for supper,
and less for breakfast.

There they all sat glum and wet and
muttering, while Oin and Gloin went on trying to
light the fire, and quarrelling about it. Bilbo was
sadly reflecting that adventures are not all pony-
rides in May-sunshine, when Balin, who was
always their look-out man, said: “There's a light
over there!” There was a hill some way off with
trees on it, pretty thick in parts. Out of the dark
mass of the trees they could now see a light
shining, a reddish comfortable-looking light, as
it might be a fire or torches twinkling.

When they had looked at it for some while,
they fell to arguing. Some said “no” and some
said “yes”. Some said they could but go and
see, and anything was better than little supper,
less breakfast, and wet clothes all the night.

Others said: “These parts are none too well
known, and are too near the mountains.
Travellers seldom come this way now. The old
maps are no use: things have changed for the
worse and the road is unguarded. They have
seldom even heard of the king round here, and
the less inquisitive you are as you go along, the
less trouble you are likely to find.” Some said:
“After all there are fourteen of us.” Others said:
“Where has Gandalf got to?” This remark was
repeated by everybody. Then the rain began to
pour down worse than ever, and Oin and Gloin
began to fight.

That settled it. “After all we have got a
burglar with us,” they said; and so they made

off, leading their ponies (with all due and proper
caution) in the direction of the light. They came
to the hill and were soon in the wood. Up the hill
they went; but there was no proper path to be
seen, such as might lead to a house or a farm;
and do what they could they made a deal of
rustling and crackling and creaking (and a good
deal of grumbling and drafting), as they went
through the trees in the pitch dark.

Suddenly the red light shone out very bright
through the tree-trunks not far ahead.

“Now it is the burglar’s turn,” they said,
meaning Bilbo. “You must go on and find out all
about that light, and what it is for, and if all is
perfectly safe and canny,” said Thorin to the
hobbit. “Now scuttle off, and come back quick, if
all is well. If not, come back if you can! If you
can't, hoot twice like a barn-owl and once like a
screech-owl, and we will do what we can.”

Off Bilbo had to go, before he could explain
that he could not hoot even once like any kind of
owl any more than fly like a bat. But at any rate
hobbits can move quietly in woods, absolutely
quietly. They take a pride in it, and Bilbo had
sniffed more than once at what he called “all this
dwarvish racket,” as they went along, though I
don’t suppose you or I would have noticed
anything at all on a windy night, not if the whole
cavalcade had passed two feet off. As for Bilbo
walking primly towards the red light, I don't
suppose even a weasel would have stirred a
whisker at it. So, naturally, he got right up to the
fire — for fire it was — without disturbing anyone.
And this is what he saw.

Three very large persons sitting round a

very large fire of beech-logs. They were
toasting mutton on long spits of wood, and
licking the gravy off their fingers. There was a
fine toothsome smell. Also there was a barrel of
good drink at hand, and they were drinking out
of jugs. But they were trolls. Obviously trolls.
Even Bilbo, in spite of his sheltered life, could
see that: from the great heavy faces of them,
and theirsize, and the shape oftheirlegs, not to
mention their language, which was not drawing-
room fashion at all, at all.

“Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and
blimey, if it don't look like mutton again
tomorrer,” said one of the trolls.

“Never a blinking bit of manflesh have we
had for long enough,” said a second. “What the
'ell William was a-thinkin' of to bring us into
these parts at all, beats me — and the drink
runnin' short, what's more,” he said jogging the
elbow of William, who was taking a pull at his

jug.

William choked. “Shut yer mouth!” he said
as soon as he could. “Yer can't expect folk to
stop here for ever just to be et by you and Bert.
You've et a village and a half between yer, since
we come down from the mountains. How much
more d'yer want? And time's been up our way
when yer'd have said ‘thank yer Bill’ for a nice
bit o’ fat valley mutton like what this is.” He took
a big bite off a sheep's leg he was roasting,
and wiped his lips on his sleeve.

Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that,
even those with only one head each. After
hearing all this Bilbo ought to have done
something at once. Either he should have gone

back quietly and warned his friends that there
were three fair-sized trolls at hand in a nasty
mood, quite likely to try roasted dwarf, or even
pony, for a change; or else he should have done
a bit of good quick burgling. A really first-class
and legendary burglar would at this point have
picked the trolls’ pockets — it is nearly always
worth while, if you can manage it — , pinched the
very mutton off the spits, purloined the beer, and
walked off without their noticing him. Others
more practical but with less professional pride
would perhaps have stuck a dagger into each
of them before they observed it. Then the night
could have been spent cheerily.

Bilbo knew it. He had read of a good many
things he had never seen or done. He was very
much alarmed, as well as disgusted; he wished
himself a hundred miles away, and yet — and yet
somehow he could not go straight back to
Thorin and Company emptyhanded. So he
stood and hesitated in the shadows. Of the
various burglarious proceedings he had heard
of picking the trolls' pockets seemed the least
difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree just
behind William.

Bert and Tom went off to the barrel. William
was having another drink. Then Bilbo plucked
up courage and put his little hand in William's
enormous pocket. There was a purse in it, as
big as a bag to Bilbo. “Ha!” thought he,
warming to his new work as he lifted it carefully
out, “this is a beginning!”

It was! Trolls' purses are the mischief, and
this was no exception. “’Ere, 'oo are you?” it
squeaked, as it left the pocket; and William

turned round at once and grabbed Bilbo by the
neck, before he could duck behind the tree.

“Blimey, Bert, look what I’ve copped!” said
William.

“What is it?” said the others coming up.

“Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?”

“Bilbo Baggins, a bur — a hobbit,” said poor
Bilbo, shaking all over, and wondering how to
make owl-noises before they throttled him.

“A burrahobbit?” said they a bit startled.
Trolls are slow in the uptake, and mighty
suspicious about anything new to them.

“What's a burrahobbit got to do with my
pocket, anyways?” said William.

“And can yer cook 'em?” said Tom.

“Yer can try," said Bert, picking up a
skewer.

“He wouldn't make above a mouthful,” said
William, who had already had a fine supper,
“not when he was skinned and boned.”

“P'raps there are more like him round
about, and we might make a pie,” said Bert.
“Here you, are there any more of your sort a-
sneakin' in these here woods, yer nassty little
rabbit,” said he looking at the hobbit's furry feet;
and he picked him up by the toes and shook
him.

“Yes, lots,” said Bilbo, before he
remembered not to give his friends away. “No
none at all, not one,” he said immediately
afterwards.

“What d'yer mean?” said Bert, holding him
right way up, bythe hairthis time.

“What I say,” said Bilbo gasping. “And
please don't cook me, kind sirs! I am a good

cook myself, and cook better than I cook, if you
see what I mean. I’ll cook beautifully for you, a
perfectly beautiful breakfast for you, if only you
won't have me for supper.”

“Poor little blighter,” said William. He had
already had as much supper as he could hold;
also he had had lots of beer. “Poor little
blighter! Let him go!”

“Not till he says what he means by lots and
none at all," said Bert. “I don't want to have me
throat cut in me sleep! Hold his toes in the fire,
till he talks!”

“I won’t have it,” said William. “I caught him
anyway.”

“You're a fat fool, William,” said Bert, “as
I've said afore this evening.”

“And you're a lout!”

“And I won't take that from you, Bill
Huggins,” says Bert, and puts his fist in
William's eye.

Then there was a gorgeous row. Bilbo had
just enough wits left, when Bert dropped him on
the ground, to scramble out of the way of their
feet, before they were fighting like dogs, and
calling one another all sorts of perfectly true and
applicable names in very loud voices. Soon
they were locked in one another’s arms, and
rolling nearly into the fire kicking and thumping,
while Tom whacked at them both with a branch
to bring them to their senses — and that of
course only made them madder than ever.

That would have been the time for Bilbo to
have left. But his poor little feet had been very
squashed in Bert's big paw, and he had no
breath in his body, and his head was going

round; so there he lay for a while panting, just
outside the circle of firelight.

Right in the middle of the fight up came
Balin. The dwarves had heard noises from a
distance, and after waiting for some time for
Bilbo to come back, or to hoot like an owl, they
started off one by one to creep towards the light
as quietly as they could. No sooner did Tom
see Balin come into the light than he gave an
awful howl. Trolls simply detest the very sight of
dwarves (uncooked). Bert and Bill stopped
fighting immediately, and “a sack, Tom, quick!”
they said. Before Balin, who was wondering
where in all this commotion Bilbo was, knew
what was happening, a sack was over his head,
and he was down.

“There's more to come yet,” said Tom, “or
I'm mighty mistook. Lots and none at all, it is,”
said he. “No burrahobbits, but lots of these here
dwarves. That's about the shape of it!”

“I reckon you’re right,” said Bert, “and we’d
best get out of the light.”

And so they did. With sacks in their hands,
that they used for carrying off mutton and other
plunder, they waited in the shadows. As each
dwarf came up and looked at the fire, and the
spilled jugs, and the gnawed mutton, in
surprise, pop! went a nasty smelly sack over his
head, and he was down. Soon Dwalin lay by
Balin, and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and
Nori and Ori all in a heap, and Oin and Gloin
and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur piled
uncomfortably near the fire.

“That’ll teach 'em,” said Tom; for Bifur and
Bombur had given a lot of trouble, and fought

[ike mad, as dwarves will when cornered.

Thorin came last — and he was not caught
unawares. He came expecting mischief, and
didn't need to see his friends' legs sticking out
of sacks to tell him that things were not all well.
He stood outside in the shadows some way off,
and said: “What's all this trouble? Who has
been knocking my people about?”

“It's trolls!” said Bilbo from behind a tree.
They had forgotten all about him. “They’re
hiding in the bushes with sacks,” said he.

“O! are they?” said Thorin, and he jumped
forward to the fire, before they could leap on
him. He caught up a big branch all on fire at one
end: and Bert got that end in his eye before he
could step aside. That put him out of the battle
for a bit. Bilbo did his best. He caught hold of
Tom’s leg — as well as he could, it was thick as
a young tree-trunk — but he was sent spinning
up into the top of some bushes, when Tom
kicked the sparks up in Thorin's face.

The Trolls

Tom got the branch in his teeth for that, and
lost one of the front ones. It made him howl, I
can tell you. But just at that moment William
came up behind and popped a sack right over
Thorin's head and down to his toes. And so the
fight ended. A nice pickle they were all in now:
all neatly tied up in sacks, with three angry trolls
(and two with burns and bashes to remember)
sitting by them, arguing whether they should
roast them slowly, or mince them fine and boil
them, or just sit on them one by one and squash
them into jelly; and Bilbo up in a bush, with his
clothes and his skin torn, not daring to move for
fear they should hear him.

It was just then that Gandalf came back. But no
one saw him. The trolls had just decided to
roast the dwarves now and eat them later — that
was Bert's idea, and after a lot of argument they
had all agreed to it.

“No good roasting 'em now, it'd take all
night,” said a voice. Bert thought it was
William's.

“Don't start the argument all over again,
Bill,” he said, “or it wll take all night.”

“Who's a-arguing?” said William, who
thought it was Bert that had spoken.

“You are,” said Bert.

“You’re a liar,” said William; and so the
argument began all over again. In the end they
decided to mince them fine and boil them. So
they got a great black pot, and they took out
their knives.

“No good boiling 'em! We ain't got no

water, and it's a long way to the well and all,”
said a voice. Bert and William thought it was
Tom’s.

“Shut up!” said they, “or we'll never have
done. And yer can fetch the water yerself, if yer
say any more.”

“Shut up yerself!” said Tom, who thought it
was William's voice. “Who’s arguing but you, I’d
like to know.”

“You’re a booby,” said William.

“Booby yerself!” said Tom.

And so the argument began all over again,
and went on hotter than ever, until at last they
decided to sit on the sacks one by one and
squash them, and boil them next time.

“Who shall we sit on first?” said the voice.

“Better sit on the last fellow first,” said Bert,
whose eye had been damaged by Thorin. He
thought Tom was talking.

“Don't talk to yerself!” said Tom. “But if you
wants to sit on the last one, sit on him. Which is
he?”

“The one with the yellow stockings," said
Bert.

“Nonsense, the one with the grey
stockings,” said a voice like William's.

“I made sure it was yellow,” said Bert.

“Yellow it was,” said William.

“Then what did yer say it was grey for?”
said Bert.

“I never did. Tom said it.”

“That I never did!” said Tom. “It was you.”

“Two to one, so shut yer mouth!” said Bert.

“Who are you a-talkin' to?” said William.

“Now stop it!” said Tom and Bert together.

“The night's gettin’ on, and dawn comes early.
Let's get on with it!”

“Dawn take you all, and be stone to you!”
said a voice that sounded like William’s. But it
wasn't. For just at that moment the light came
over the hill, and there was a mighty twitter in
the branches. William never spoke for he stood
turned to stone as he stooped; and Bert and
Tom were stuck like rocks as they looked at
him. And there they stand to this day, all alone,
unless the birds perch on them; for trolls, as you
probably know, must be underground before
dawn, or they go back to the stuff of the
mountains they are made of, and never move
again. That is what had happened to Bert and
Tom and William.

“Excellent!” said Gandalf, as he stepped
from behind a tree, and helped Bilbo to climb
down out of a thorn-bush. Then Bilbo
understood. It was the wizard's voice that had
kept the trolls bickering and quarrelling, until the
light came and made an end of them.

The next thing was to untie the sacks and let
out the dwarves. They were nearly suffocated,
and very annoyed: they had not at all enjoyed
lying there listening to the trolls making plans for
roasting them and squashing them and mincing
them. They had to hear Bilbo's account of what
had happened to him twice over, before they
were satisfied.

“Silly time to go practising pinching and
pocket-picking,” said Bombur, “when what we
wanted was fire and food!”

“And that’s just what you wouldn't have got
of those fellows without a struggle, in any case,”

said Gandalf. “Anyhow you are wasting time
now. Don't you realize that the trolls must have a
cave or a hole dug somewhere near to hide
from the sun in? We must look into it!”

They searched about, and soon found the
marks of trolls' stony boots going away through
the trees. They followed the tracks up the hill,
until hidden by bushes they came on a big door
of stone leading to a cave. But they could not
open it, not though they all pushed while
Gandalf tried various incantations.

“Would this be any good?” asked Bilbo,
when they were getting tired and angry. “I found
it on the ground where the trolls had their fight.”
He held out a largish key, though no doubt
William had thought it very small and secret. It
must have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily,
before he was turned to stone.

“Why on earth didn't you mention it before?”
they cried. Gandalf grabbed it and fitted it into
the keyhole. Then the stone door swung back
with one big push, and they all went inside.
There were bones on the floor and a nasty smell
was in the air; but there was a good deal of
food jumbled carelessly on shelves and on the
ground, among an untidy litter of plunder, of all
sorts from brass buttons to pots full of gold
coins standing in a corner. There were lots of
clothes, too, hanging on the walls — too small for
trolls, I am afraid they belonged to victims — and
among them were several swords of various
makes, shapes, and sizes. Two caught their
eyes particularly, because of their beautiful
scabbards and jewelled hilts.

Gandalf and Thorin each took one of these;

and Bilbo took a knife in a leather sheath. It
would have made only a tiny pocket-knife for a
troll, but it was as good as a short sword for the
hobbit.

“These look like good blades,” said the
wizard, half drawing them and looking at them
curiously. “They were not made by any troll, nor
by any smith among men in these parts and
days; but when we can read the runes on them,
we shall know more about them.”

“Let's get out of this horrible smell!” said
Fili. So they carried out the pots of coins, and
such food as was untouched and looked fit to
eat, also one barrel of ale which was still full. By
that time they felt like breakfast, and being very
hungry they did not turn their noses up at what
they had got from the trolls’ larder. Their own
provisions were very scanty. Now they had
bread and cheese, and plenty of ale, and bacon
to toast in the embers of the fire.

After that they slept, for their night had been
disturbed; and they did nothing more till the
afternoon. Then they brought up their ponies,
and carried away the pots of gold, and buried
them very secretly not far from the track by the
river, putting a great many spells over them, just
in case they ever had the chance to come back
and recover them. When that was done, they all
mounted once more, and jogged along again
on the path towards the East.

“Where did you go to, if I may ask?” said
Thorin to Gandalf as they rode along.

“To look ahead,” said he.

“And what brought you back in the nick of
time?”

“Looking behind,” said he.

“Exactly!” said Thorin; “but could you be
more plain?”

“I went on to spy out our road. It will soon
become dangerous and difficult. Also I was
anxious about replenishing our small stock of
provisions. I had not gone very far, however,
when I met a couple of friends of mine from
Rivendell.”

“Where's that?” asked Bilbo.

“Don't interrupt!” said Gandalf. “You will get
there in a few days now, if we’re lucky, and find
out all about it. As I was saying I met two of
Elrond's people. They were hurrying along for
fear of the trolls. It was they who told me that
three of them had come down from the
mountains and settled in the woods not far from
the road: they had frightened everyone away
from the district, and they waylaid strangers.

“I immediately had a feeling that I was
wanted back. Looking behind I saw a fire in the
distance and made for it. So now you know.
Please be more careful, next time, or we shall
never get anywhere!”

“Thank you!” said Thorin.

Chapter III

A SHORT REST

They did not sing or tell stories that day, even
though the weather improved; nor the next day,
nor the day after. They had begun to feel that
danger was not far away on either side. They
camped under the stars, and their horses had
more to eat than they had; for there was plenty
of grass, but there was not much in their bags,
even with what they had got from the trolls. One
morning they forded a river at a wide shallow
place full of the noise of stones and foam. The
far bank was steep and slippery. When they got
to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw
that the great mountains had marched down
very near to them. Already they seemed only a
day’s easy journey from the feet of the nearest.
Dark and drear it looked, though there were
patches of sunlight on its brown sides, and
behind its shoulders the tips of snow-peaks
gleamed.

“Is that The Mountain?” asked Bilbo in a
solemn voice, looking at it with round eyes. He
had never seen a thing that looked so big
before.

“Of course not!” said Balin. “That is only the
beginning of the Misty Mountains, and we have
got to get through, or over, or under those
somehow, before we can come into Wilderland
beyond. And it is a deal of a way even from the
other side of them to the Lonely Mountain in the
East where Smaug lies on our treasure.”

“O!” said Bilbo, and just at that moment he
felt more tired than he ever remembered feeling
before. He was thinking once again of his
comfortable chair before the fire in his favourite
sitting-room in his hobbit-hole, and of the kettle
singing. Not for the last time!

Now Gandalf led the way. “We must not miss
the road, or we shall be done for,” he said. “We
need food, for one thing, and rest in reasonable
safety — also it is very necessary to tackle the
Misty Mountains by the proper path, or else you
will get lost in them, and have to come back and
start at the beginning again (if you ever get
back at all).”

They asked him where he was making for,

and he answered: “You are come to the very
edge of the Wild, as some of you may know.
Hidden somewhere ahead of us is the fair
valley of Rivendell where Elrond lives in the Last
Homely House. I sent a message by my friends,
and we are expected.”

That sounded nice and comforting, but they
had not got there yet, and it was not so easy as
it sounds to find the Last Homely House west of
the Mountains. There seemed to be no trees
and no valleys and no hills to break the ground
in front of them, only one vast slope going slowly
up and up to meet the feet of the nearest
mountain, a wide land the colour of heather and
crumbling rock, with patches and slashes of
grass-green and moss-green showing where
water might be.

Morning passed, afternoon came; but in all
the silent waste there was no sign of any
dwelling. They were growing anxious, for they
saw now that the house might be hidden almost
anywhere between them and the mountains.
They came on unexpected valleys, narrow with
steep sides, that opened suddenly at their feet,
and they looked down surprised to see trees
below them and running water at the bottom.
There were gullies that they could almost leap
over, but very deep with waterfalls in them.
There were dark ravines that one could neither

jump over nor climb into. There were bogs,
some of them green pleasant places to look at,
with flowers growing bright and tall; but a pony
that walked there with a pack on its back would
never have come out again.

It was indeed a much wider land from the
ford to the mountains than ever you would have
guessed. Bilbo was astonished. The only path
was marked with white stones, some of which
were small, and others were half covered with
moss or heather. Altogether it was a very slow
business following the track, even guided by
Gandalf, who seemed to know his way about
pretty well.

His head and beard wagged this way and
that as he looked for the stones, and they
followed his lead, but they seemed no nearer to
the end of the search when the day began to
fail. Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed
supper-time would soon do the same. There
were moths fluttering about, and the light
became very dim, for the moon had not risen.
Bilbo’s pony began to stumble over roots and
stones. They came to the edge of a steep fall in
the ground so suddenly that Gandalfs horse
nearly slipped down the slope.

“Here it is at last!” he called, and the others
gathered round him and looked over the edge.
They saw a valley far below. They could hear

the voice of hurrying water in a rocky bed at the
bottom; the scent of trees was in the air; and
there was a light on the valley-side across the
water.

Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered
and slipped in the dusk down the steep zig-zag
path into the secret valley of Rivendell. The air
grew warmer as they got lower, and the smell of
the pine-trees made him drowsy, so that every
now and again he nodded and nearly fell off, or
bumped his nose on the pony’s neck. Their
spirits rose as they went down and down. The
trees changed to beech and oak, and there was
a comfortable feeling in the twilight. The last
green had almost faded out of the grass, when
they came at length to an open glade not far
above the banks of the stream.

“Hmmm! it smells like elves!” thought Bilbo,
and he looked up at the stars. They were
burning bright and blue. Just then there came a
burst of song like laughter in the trees:

O! What are you doing,

And where are you going?
Your ponies need shoeing!
The river is flowing!

O! tra-la-la-lally
here down in the valley!

O! What are you seeking,
And where are you making?
The faggots are reeking,

The bannocks are baking!
0! tril-lil-lil-lolly
the valley is jolly,
ha! ha!

0! Where are you going
With beards all a-wagging?
No knowing, no knowing
What brings Mister Baggins
And Balin and Dwalin
down into the valley
in June
ha! ha!

0! Will you be staying,

Or will you be flying?
Your ponies are straying!
The daylight is dying!

To fly would be folly,

To stay would be jolly
And listen and hark
Till the end of the dark
to our tune
ha! ha!

So they laughed and sang in the trees; and
pretty fair nonsense I daresay you think it. Not
that they would care; they would only laugh all
the more if you told them so. They were elves of
course. Soon Bilbo caught glimpses of them as
the darkness deepened. He loved elves, though
he seldom met them; but he was a little
frightened of them too. Dwarves don’t get on
well with them. Even decent enough dwarves
like Thorin and his friends think them foolish
(which is a very foolish thing to think), or get
annoyed with them. For some elves tease them
and laugh at them, and most of all at their
beards.

“Well, well!” said a voice. “Just look! Bilbo
the hobbit on a pony, my dear! Isn’t it delicious!”

“Most astonishing wonderful!”

Then off they went into another song as
ridiculous as the one I have written down in full.
At last one, a tall young fellow, came out from
the trees and bowed to Gandalf and to Thorin.

“Welcome to the valley!” he said.

“Thank you!” said Thorin a bit gruffly; but
Gandalf was already off his horse and among
the elves, talking merrily with them.

“You are a little out of your way,” said the elf:
“that is, if you are making for the only path
across the water and to the house beyond. We
will set you right, but you had best get on foot,
until you are over the bridge. Are you going to
stay a bit and sing with us, or will you go straight
on? Supper is preparing over there,” he said. “I
can smell the wood-fires for the cooking.”

Tired as he was, Bilbo would have liked to
stay a while. Elvish singing is not a thing to
miss, in June under the stars, not if you care for
such things. Also he would have liked to have a
few private words with these people that
seemed to know his names and all about him,
although he had never seen them before. He
thought their opinion of his adventure might be
interesting. Elves know a lot and are wondrous
folk for news, and know what is going on among
the peoples of the land, as quick as water flows,
or quicker.

But the dwarves were all for supper as soon
as possible just then, and would not stay. On
they all went, leading their ponies, till they were
brought to a good path and so at last to the very
brink of the river. It was flowing fast and noisily,

as mountain-streams do of a summer evening,
when sun has been all day on the snow far up
above. There was only a narrow bridge of stone
without a parapet, as narrow as a pony could
well walk on; and over that they had to go, slow
and careful, one by one, each leading his pony
by the bridle. The elves had brought bright
lanterns to the shore, and they sang a merry
song as the party went across.

“Don’t dip your beard in the foam, father!”
they cried to Thorin, who was bent almost on to
his hands and knees. “It is long enough without
watering it.”

“Mind Bilbo doesn’t eat all the cakes!” they
called. "He is too fat to get through key-holes
yet!”

“Hush, hush! Good People! and good
night!” said Gandalf, who came last. “Valleys
have ears, and some elves have over merry
tongues. Good night!”

And so at last they all came to the Last
Homely House, and found its doors flung wide.

Now it is a strange thing, but things that are
good to have and days that are good to spend
are soon told about, and not much to listen to;
while things that are uncomfortable, palpitating,

and even gruesome, may make a good tale,
and take a deal of telling anyway. They stayed
long in that good house, fourteen days at least,
and they found it hard to leave. Bilbo would
gladly have stopped there for ever and ever —
even supposing a wish would have taken him
right back to his hobbit-hole without trouble. Yet
there is little to tell about their stay.

The master of the house was an elf-friend —
one of those people whose fathers came into
the strange stories before the beginning of
History, the wars of the evil goblins and the
elves and the first men in the North. In those
days of our tale there were still some people
who had both elves and heroes of the North for
ancestors, and Elrond the master of the house
was their chief.

He was as noble and as fair in face as an
elf-lord, as strong as a warrior, as wise as a
wizard, as venerable as a king of dwarves, and
as kind as summer. He comes into many tales,
but his part in the story of Bilbo’s great
adventure is only a small one, though important,
as you will see, if we ever get to the end of it.
His house was perfect, whether you liked food,
or sleep, or work, or story-telling, or singing, or
just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant
mixture of them all. Evil things did not come into
that valley.

I wish I had time to tell you even a few of the
tales or one or two of the songs that they heard
in that house. All of them, the ponies as well,
grew refreshed and strong in a few days there.
Their clothes were mended as well as their
bruises, their tempers and their hopes. Their
bags were filled with food and provisions light
to carry but strong to bring them over the
mountain passes. Their plans were improved
with the best advice. So the time came to
midsummer eve, and they were to go on again
with the early sun on midsummer morning.

Elrond knew all about runes of every kind.
That day he looked at the swords they had
brought from the trolls’ lair, and he said: “These
are not troll-make. They are old swords, very old
swords of the High Elves of the West, my kin.
They were made in Gondolin for the Goblin-
wars. They must have come from a dragon’s
hoard or goblin plunder, for dragons and
goblins destroyed that city many ages ago.
This, Thorin, the runes name Orcrist, the Goblin-
cleaver in the ancient tongue of Gondolin; it was
a famous blade. This, Gandalf, was Glamdring,
Foe-hammer that the king of Gondolin once
wore. Keep them well!”

“Whence did the trolls get them, I wonder?”
said Thorin looking at his sword with new
interest.

“I could not say,” said Elrond, “but one may
guess that your trolls had plundered other
plunderers, or come on the remnants of old
robberies in some hold in the mountains. I have
heard that there are still forgotten treasures of
old to be found in the deserted caverns of the
mines of Moria, since the dwarf and goblin
war.”

Thorin pondered these words. “I will keep
this sword in honour,” he said. “May it soon
cleave goblins once again!”

“A wish that is likely to be granted soon
enough in the mountains!” said Elrond. “But
show me now your map!”

He took it and gazed long at it, and he
shook his head; for if he did not altogether
approve of dwarves and their love of gold, he
hated dragons and their cruel wickedness, and
he grieved to remember the ruin of the town of
Dale and its merry bells, and the burned banks
of the bright River Running. The moon was
shining in a broad silver crescent. He held up
the map and the white light shone through it.
“What is this?” he said. “There are moon-letters
here, beside the plain runes which say ‘five feet
high the door and three may walk abreast.’”

“What are moon-letters?” asked the hobbit
full of excitement. He loved maps, as I have told
you before; and he also liked runes and letters

and cunning handwriting, though when he wrote
himself it was a bit thin and spidery.

“Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you
cannot see them,” said Elrond, “not when you
look straight at them. They can only be seen
when the moon shines behind them, and what is
more, with the more cunning sort it must be a
moon of the same shape and season as the
day when they were written. The dwarves
invented them and wrote them with silver pens,
as your friends could tell you. These must have
been written on a midsummer’s eve in a
crescent moon, a long while ago.”

“What do they say?” asked Gandalf and
Thorin together, a bit vexed perhaps that even
Elrond should have found this out first, though
really there had not been a chance before, and
there would not have been another until
goodness knows when.

“Stand by the grey stone when the thrush

knocks. ” read Elrond, “and the setting sun with
the last light of Durin’s Day will shine upon the
key-hole.”

“Durin, Durin!” said Thorin. “He was the
father of the fathers of the eldest race of
Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first
ancestor: I am his heir.”

“Then what is Durin’s Day?” asked Elrond.

“The first day of the dwarves’ New Year,”

said Thorin, “is as all should know the first day
of the last moon of Autumn on the threshold of
Winter. We still call it Durin’s Day when the last
moon of Autumn and the sun are in the sky
together. But this will not help us much, I fear, for
it passes our skill in these days to guess when
such a time will come again.”

“That remains to be seen,” said Gandalf. “Is
there any more writing?”

"None to be seen by this moon,” said
Elrond, and he gave the map back to Thorin;
and then they went down to the water to see the
elves dance and sing upon the midsummer’s
eve.

The next morning was a midsummer’s
morning as fair and fresh as could be dreamed:
blue sky and never a cloud, and the sun dancing
on the water. Now they rode away amid songs
of farewell and good speed, with their hearts
ready for more adventure, and with a
knowledge of the road they must follow over the
Misty Mountains to the land beyond.

Chapter IV

OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL

There were many paths that led up into those
mountains, and many passes over them. But
most of the paths were cheats and deceptions
and led nowhere or to bad ends; and most of
the passes were infested by evil things and
dreadful dangers. The dwarves and the hobbit,
helped by the wise advice of Elrond and the
knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the
right road to the right pass.

Long days after they had climbed out of the
valley and left the Last Homely House miles
behind, they were still going up and up and up. It
was a hard path and a dangerous path, a
crooked way and a lonely and a long. Now they
could look back over the lands they had left, laid
out behind them far below. Far, far away in the
West, where things were blue and faint, Bilbo
knew there lay his own country of safe and
comfortable things, and his little hobbit-hole. He
shivered. It was getting bitter cold up here, and
the wind came shrill among the rocks. Boulders,
too, at times came galloping down the
mountain-sides, let loose by mid-day sun upon

the snow, and passed among them (which was
lucky), or over their heads (which was
alarming). The nights were comfortless and
chill, and they did not dare to sing or talk too
loud, for the echoes were uncanny, and the
silence seemed to dislike being broken —
except by the noise of water and the wail of
wind and the crack of stone.

“The summer is getting on down below,”
thought Bilbo, “and haymaking is going on and
picnics. They will be harvesting and
blackberrying, before we even begin to go
down the other side at this rate.” And the others
were thinking equally gloomy thoughts, although
when they had said good-bye to Elrond in the
high hope of a midsummer morning, they had
spoken gaily of the passage of the mountains,
and of riding swift across the lands beyond.
They had thought of coming to the secret door
in the Lonely Mountain, perhaps that very next
last moon of Autumn — “and perhaps it will be
Durin’s Day” they had said. Only Gandalf had
shaken his head and said nothing. Dwarves
had not passed that way for many years, but
Gandalf had, and he knew how evil and danger
had grown and thriven in the Wild, since the
dragons had driven men from the lands, and the
goblins had spread in secret after the battle of
the Mines of Moria. Even the good plans of
wise wizards like Gandalf and of good friends
like Elrond go astray sometimes when you are
off on dangerous adventures over the Edge of

the Wild; and Gandalf was a wise enough
wizard to know it.

He knew that something unexpected might
happen, and he hardly dared to hope that they
would pass without fearful adventure over those
great tall mountains with lonely peaks and
valleys where no king ruled. They did not. All
was well, until one day they met a thunderstorm
— more than a thunderstorm, a thunder-battle.
You know how terrific a really big thunderstorm
can be down in the land and in a river-valley;
especially at times when two great
thunderstorms meet and clash. More terrible
still are thunder and lightning in the mountains at
night, when storms come up from East and
West and make war. The lightning splinters on
the peaks, and rocks shiver, and great crashes
split the air and go rolling and tumbling into
every cave and hollow; and the darkness is
filled with overwhelming noise and sudden light.

Bilbo had never seen or imagined anything
of the kind. They were high up in a narrow
place, with a dreadful fall into a dim valley at
one side of them. There they were sheltering
under a hanging rock for the night, and he lay
beneath a blanket and shook from head to toe.
When he peeped out in the lightning-flashes, he
saw that across the valley the stone-giants were
out, and were hurling rocks at one another for a
game, and catching them, and tossing them

down into the darkness where they smashed
among the trees far below, or splintered into
little bits with a bang. Then came a wind and a
rain, and the wind whipped the rain and the hail
about in every direction, so that an overhanging
rock was no protection at all. Soon they were
getting drenched and their ponies were
standing with their heads down and their tails
between their legs, and some of them were
whinnying with fright. They could hear the giants
guffawing and shouting all over the
mountainsides.

“This won't do at all!” said Thorin. “If we
don’t get blown off, or drowned, or struck by
lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant
and kicked sky-high for a football.”

The Mountain-path

“Well, if you know of anywhere better, take
us there!” said Gandalf, who was feeling very
grumpy, and was far from happy about the
giants himself.

The end of their argument was that they
sent Fili and Kili to look for a better shelter.
They had very sharp eyes, and being the
youngest of the dwarves by some fifty years
they usually got these sort of jobs (when
everybody could see that it was absolutely no
use sending Bilbo). There is nothing like
looking, if you want to find something (or so
Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly
usually find something, if you look, but it is not
always quite the something you were after. So it
proved on this occasion.

Soon Fili and Kili came crawling back,
holding on to the rocks in the wind. “We have
found a dry cave,” they said, “not far round the
next corner; and ponies and all could get
inside.”

“Flave you thoroughly explored it?” said the
wizard, who knew that caves up in the
mountains were seldom unoccupied.

“Yes, yes!” they said, though everybody
knew they could not have been long about it;
they had come back too quick. “It isn't all that
big, and it does not go far back.”

That, of course, is the dangerous part about

caves: you don’t know how far they go back,
sometimes, or where a passage behind may
lead to, or what is waiting for you inside. But
now Fili and Kili’s news seemed good enough.
So they all got up and prepared to move. The
wind was howling and the thunder still growling,
and they had a business getting themselves
and their ponies along. Still it was not very far to
go, and before long they came to a big rock
standing out into the path. If you stepped
behind, you found a low arch in the side of the
mountain. There was just room to get the
ponies through with a squeeze, when they had
been unpacked and unsaddled. As they passed
under the arch, it was good to hear the wind
and the rain outside instead of all about them,
and to feel safe from the giants and their rocks.
But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his
wand — as he did that day in Bilbo’s dining-
room that seemed so long ago, if you
remember — , and by its light they explored the
cave from end to end.

It seemed quite a fair size, but not too large
and mysterious. It had a dry floor and some
comfortable nooks. At one end there was room
for the ponies; and there they stood (mighty
glad of the change) steaming, and champing in
their nosebags. Oin and Gloin wanted to light a
fire at the door to dry their clothes, but Gandalf
would not hear of it. So they spread out their
wet things on the floor, and got dry ones out of
their bundles; then they made their blankets

comfortable, got out their pipes and blew
smoke rings, which Gandalf turned into different
colours and set dancing up by the roof to
amuse them. They talked and talked, and forgot
about the storm, and discussed what each
would do with his share of the treasure (when
they got it, which at the moment did not seem
so impossible); and so they dropped off to
sleep one by one. And that was the last time
that they used the ponies, packages,
baggages, tools and paraphernalia that they
had brought with them.

It turned out a good thing that night that they
had brought little Bilbo with them, after all. For,
somehow, he could not go to sleep for a long
while; and when he did sleep, he had very nasty
dreams. He dreamed that a crack in the wall at
the back of the cave got bigger and bigger, and
opened wider and wider, and he was very
afraid but could not call out or do anything but
lie and look. Then he dreamed that the floor of
the cave was giving way, and he was slipping —
beginning to fall down, down, goodness knows
where to.

At that he woke up with a horrible start, and
found that part of his dream was true. A crack
had opened at the back of the cave, and was
already a wide passage. He was just in time to
see the last of the ponies’ tails disappearing
into it. Of course he gave a very loud yell, as
loud a yell as a hobbit can give, which is
surprising for their size.

Out jumped the goblins, big goblins, great
ugly-looking goblins, lots of goblins, before you
could say rocks and blocks. There were six to
each dwarf, at least, and two even for Bilbo;
and they were all grabbed and carried through
the crack, before you could say tinder and flint.
But not Gandalf. Bilbo’s yell had done that much
good. It had wakened him up wide in a
splintered second, and when goblins came to
grab him, there was a terrific flash like lightning
in the cave, a smell like gunpowder, and several
of them fell dead.

The crack closed with a snap, and Bilbo
and the dwarves were on the wrong side of it!
Where was Gandalf? Of that neither they nor the
goblins had any idea, and the goblins did not
wait to find out. They seized Bilbo and the
dwarves and hurried them along. It was deep,
deep, dark, such as only goblins that have
taken to living in the heart of the mountains can
see through. The passages there were crossed
and tangled in all directions, but the goblins
knew their way, as well as you do to the nearest
post-office; and the way went down and down,
and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins were
very rough, and pinched unmercifully, and
chuckled and laughed in their horrible stony
voices; and Bilbo was more unhappy even than
when the troll had picked him up by his toes. He
wished again and again for his nice bright
hobbit-hole. Not for the last time.

Now there came a glimmer of a red light

before them. The goblins began to sing, or
croak, keeping time with the flap of their flat feet
on the stone, and shaking their prisoners as
well.

Clap! Snap! the black crack!
Grip, grab! Pinch, nab!

And down down to Goblin-town
You go, my lad!

Clash, crash! Crush, smash!

Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs!
Pound, pound, far underground!

Ho, ho! my lad!

Swish, smack! Whip crack!

Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat!
Work, work! Nor dare to shirk,

While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh,
Round and round far underground
Below, my lad!

It sounded truly terrifying. The walls echoed
to the clap, snap! and the crush, smash\ and to
the ugly laughter of their ho, ho! my lad! The

general meaning of the song was only too plain;
for now the goblins took out whips and whipped
them with a s\nish, smack!, and set them
running as fast as they could in front of them;
and more than one of the dwarves were already
yammering and bleating like anything, when
they stumbled into a big cavern.

It was lit by a great red fire in the middle,
and by torches along the walls, and it was full of
goblins. They all laughed and stamped and
clapped their hands, when the dwarves (with
poor little Bilbo at the back and nearest to the
whips) came running in, while the goblin-drivers
whooped and cracked their whips behind. The
ponies were already there huddled in a corner;
and there were all the baggages and packages
lying broken open, and being rummaged by
goblins, and smelt by goblins, and fingered by
goblins, and quarrelled over by goblins.

I am afraid that was the last they ever saw
of those excellent little ponies, including a jolly
sturdy little white fellow that Elrond had lent to
Gandalf, since his horse was not suitable for the
mountain-paths. For goblins eat horses and
ponies and donkeys (and other much more
dreadful things), and they are always hungry.
Just now however the prisoners were thinking
only of themselves. The goblins chained their
hands behind their backs and linked them all
together in a line, and dragged them to the far
end of the cavern with little Bilbo tugging at the
end of the row.

There in the shadows on a large flat stone
sat a tremendous goblin with a huge head, and
armed goblins were standing round him
carrying the axes and the bent swords that they
use. Now goblins are cruel, wicked, and bad-
hearted. They make no beautiful things, but they
make many clever ones. They can tunnel and
mine as well as any but the most skilled
dwarves, when they take the trouble, though
they are usually untidy and dirty. Hammers,
axes, swords, daggers, pickaxes, tongs, and
also instruments of torture, they make very well,
or get other people to make to their design,
prisoners and slaves that have to work till they
die for want of air and light. It is not unlikely that
they invented some of the machines that have
since troubled the world, especially the
ingenious devices for killing large numbers of
people at once, for wheels and engines and
explosions always delighted them, and also not
working with their own hands more than they
could help; but in those days and those wild
parts they had not advanced (as it is called) so
far. They did not hate dwarves especially, no
more than they hated everybody and everything,
and particularly the orderly and prosperous; in
some parts wicked dwarves had even made
alliances with them. But they had a special
grudge against Thorin’s people, because of the
war which you have heard mentioned, but which
does not come into this tale; and anyway
goblins don't care who they catch, as long as it

is done smart and secret, and the prisoners are
not able to defend themselves.

“Who are these miserable persons?” said
the Great Goblin.

“Dwarves, and this!” said one of the drivers,
pulling at Bilbo’s chain so that he fell forward
onto his knees. “We found them sheltering in
our Front Porch.”

“What do you mean by it?” said the Great
Goblin turning to Thorin. “Up to no good, I'll
warrant! Spying on the private business of my
people, I guess! Thieves, I shouldn’t be
surprised to learn! Murderers and friends of
Elves, not unlikely! Come! What have you got to
say?”

“Thorin the dwarf at your service!” he
replied — it was merely a polite nothing. “Of the
things which you suspect and imagine we had
no idea at all. We sheltered from a storm in
what seemed a convenient cave and unused;
nothing was further from our thoughts than
inconveniencing goblins in any way whatever.”
That was true enough!

“Urn!” said the Great Goblin. “So you say!
Might I ask what you were doing up in the
mountains at all, and where you were coming
from, and where you were going to? In fact I
should like to know all about you. Not that it will
do you much good, Thorin Oakenshield, I know
too much about your folk already; but let’s have
the truth, or I will prepare something particularly
uncomfortable for you!”

“We were on a journey to visit our relatives,
our nephews and nieces, and first, second, and
third cousins, and the other descendants of our
grandfathers, who live on the East side of these
truly hospitable mountains,” said Thorin, not
quite knowing what to say all at once in a
moment, when obviously the exact truth would
not do at all.

“He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!” said
one of the drivers. “Several of our people were
struck by lightning in the cave, when we invited
these creatures to come below; and they are as
dead as stones. Also he has not explained
this!” He held out the sword which Thorin had
worn, the sword which came from the Trolls' lair.

The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of
rage when he looked at it, and all his soldiers
gnashed their teeth, clashed their shields, and
stamped. They knew the sword at once. It had
killed hundreds of goblins in its time, when the
fair elves of Gondolin hunted them in the hills or
did battle before their walls. They had called it
Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it
simply Biter. They hated it and hated worse any
one that carried it.

“Murderers and elf-friends!” the Great
Goblin shouted. “Slash them! Beat them! Bite
them! Gnash them! Take them away to dark
holes full of snakes, and never let them see the
light again!” He was in such a rage that he
jumped off his seat and himself rushed at Thorin
with his mouth open.

Just at that moment all the lights in the
cavern went out, and the great fire went off
poof! into a tower of blue glowing smoke, right
up to the roof, that scattered piercing white
sparks all among the goblins.

The yells and yammering, croaking,
jibbering and jabbering; howls, growls and
curses; shrieking and skriking, that followed
were beyond description. Several hundred wild
cats and wolves being roasted slowly alive
together would not have compared with it. The
sparks were burning holes in the goblins, and
the smoke that now fell from the roof made the
air too thick for even their eyes to see through.
Soon they were falling over one another and
rolling in heaps on the floor, biting and kicking
and fighting as if they had all gone mad.

Suddenly a sword flashed in its own light.
Bilbo saw it go right through the Great Goblin
as he stood dumbfounded in the middle of his
rage. He fell dead, and the goblin soldiers fled
before the sword shrieking into the darkness.

The sword went back into its sheath.
“Follow me quick!” said a voice fierce and
quiet; and before Bilbo understood what had
happened he was trotting along again, as fast
as he could trot, at the end of the line, down
more dark passages with the yells of the goblin-
hall growing fainter behind him. A pale light was
leading them on.

“Quicker, quicker!” said the voice. “The
torches will soon be relit.”

“Half a minute!” said Dori, who was at the
back next to Bilbo, and a decent fellow. He
made the hobbit scramble on his shoulders as
best he could with his tied hands, and then off
they all went at a run, with a clink-clink of chains,
and many a stumble, since they had no hands
to steady themselves with. Not for a long while
did they stop, and by that time they must have
been right down in the very mountain’s heart.

Then Gandalf lit up his wand. Of course it
was Gandalf; but just then they were too busy to
ask how he got there. He took out his sword
again, and again it flashed in the dark by itself.
It burned with a rage that made it gleam if
goblins were about; now it was bright as blue
flame for delight in the killing of the great lord of
the cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting
through the goblin-chains and setting all the
prisoners free as quickly as possible. This
sword’s name was Glamdring the Foe-hammer,
if you remember. The goblins just called it
Beater, and hated it worse than Biter if
possible. Orcrist, too, had been saved; for
Gandalf had brought it along as well, snatching
it from one of the terrified guards. Gandalf
thought of most things; and though he could not
do everything, he could do a great deal for
friends in a tight corner.

“Are we all here?” said he, handing his
sword back to Thorin with a bow. “Let me see:
one — that's Thorin; two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; where are Fili

and Kili? Here they are! twelve, thirteen — and
here’s Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Well, well! it might
be worse, and then again it might be a good
deal better. No ponies, and no food, and no
knowing quite where we are, and hordes of
angry goblins just behind! On we go!”

On they went. Gandalf was quite right: they
began to hear goblin noises and horrible cries
far behind in the passages they had come
through. That sent them on faster than ever, and
as poor Bilbo could not possibly go half as fast
— for dwarves can roll along at a tremendous
pace, I can tell you, when they have to — they
took it in turn to carry him on their backs.

Still goblins go faster than dwarves, and
these goblins knew the way better (they had
made the paths themselves), and were madly
angry; so that do what they could the dwarves
heard the cries and howls getting closer and
closer. Soon they could hear even the flap of the
goblin feet, many many feet which seemed only
just round the last corner. The blink of red
torches could be seen behind them in the tunnel
they were following; and they were getting
deadly tired.

“Why, O why did I ever leave my hobbit-
hole!” said poor Mr. Baggins bumping up and
down on Bombur’s back.

“Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched
little hobbit on a treasure hunt!” said poor
Bombur, who was fat, and staggered along with
the sweat dripping down his nose in his heat

and terror.

At this point Gandalf fell behind, and Thorin
with him. They turned a sharp corner. “About
turn!” he shouted. “Draw your sword Thorin!”

There was nothing else to be done; and the
goblins did not like it. They came scurrying
round the corner in full cry, and found Goblin-
cleaver, and Foe-hammer shining cold and
bright right in their astonished eyes. The ones in
front dropped their torches and gave one yell
before they were killed. The ones behind yelled
still more, and leaped back knocking over those
that were running after them. “Biter and Beater!”
they shrieked; and soon they were all in
confusion, and most of them were hustling back
the way they had come.

It was quite a long while before any of them
dared to turn that corner. By that time the
dwarves had gone on again, a long, long, way
on into the dark tunnels of the goblins’ realm.
When the goblins discovered that, they put out
their torches and they slipped on soft shoes,
and they chose out their very quickest runners
with the sharpest ears and eyes. These ran
forward, as swift as weasels in the dark, and
with hardly any more noise than bats.

That is why neither Bilbo, nor the dwarves,
nor even Gandalf heard them coming. Nor did
they see them. But they were seen by the
goblins that ran silently up behind, for Gandalf
was letting his wand give out a faint light to help
the dwarves as they went along.

Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again
carrying Bilbo, was grabbed from behind in the
dark. He shouted and fell; and the hobbit rolled
off his shoulders into the blackness, bumped
his head on hard rock, and remembered
nothing more.

Chapter V

RIDDLES IN THE DARK

When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered if
he had; for it was just as dark as with them shut.
No one was anywhere near him. Just imagine
his fright! He could hear nothing, see nothing,
and he could feel nothing except the stone of
the floor.

Very slowly he got up and groped about on
all fours, till he touched the wall of the tunnel; but
neither up nor down it could he find anything:
nothing at all, no sign of goblins, no sign of
dwarves. His head was swimming, and he was
far from certain even of the direction they had
been going in when he had his fall. He guessed
as well as he could, and crawled along for a
good way, till suddenly his hand met what felt
like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of
the tunnel. It was a turning point in his career,
but he did not know it. He put the ring in his
pocket almost without thinking; certainly it did

not seem of any particular use at the moment.
He did not go much further, but sat down on the
cold floor and gave himself up to complete
miserableness, for a long while. He thought of
himself frying bacon and eggs in his own
kitchen at home — for he could feel inside that it
was high time for some meal or other; but that
only made him miserabler.

He could not think what to do; nor could he
think what had happened; or why he had been
left behind; or why, if he had been left behind,
the goblins had not caught him; or even why his
head was so sore. The truth was he had been
lying quiet, out of sight and out of mind, in a very
dark corner for a long while.

After some time he felt for his pipe. It was
not broken, and that was something. Then he
felt for his pouch, and there was some tobacco
in it, and that was something more. Then he felt
for matches and he could not find any at all, and
that shattered his hopes completely. Just as
well for him, as he agreed when he came to his
senses. Goodness knows what the striking of
matches and the smell of tobacco would have
brought on him out of dark holes in that horrible
place. Still at the moment he felt very crushed.
But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all
round himself for matches his hand came on the
hilt of his little sword — the little dagger that he

got from the trolls, and that he had quite
forgotten; nor fortunately had the goblins
noticed it, as he wore it inside his breeches.

Now he drew it out. It shone pale and dim
before his eyes. “So it is an elvish blade, too,”
he thought; “and goblins are not very near, and
yet not far enough.”

But somehow he was comforted. It was
rather splendid to be wearing a blade made in
Gondolin for the goblin-wars of which so many
songs had sung; and also he had noticed that
such weapons made a great impression on
goblins that came upon them suddenly.

“Go back?” he thought. “No good at all! Go
sideways? Impossible! Go forward? Only thing
to do! On we go!” So up he got, and trotted
along with his little sword held in front of him
and one hand feeling the wall, and his heart all
of a patter and a pitter.

Now certainly Bilbo was in what is called a tight
place. But you must remember it was not quite
so tight for him as it would have been for me or
for you. Hobbits are not quite like ordinary
people; and after all if their holes are nice
cheery places and properly aired, quite different
from the tunnels of the goblins, still they are

more used to tunnelling than we are, and they
do not easily lose their sense of direction
underground — not when their heads have
recovered from being bumped. Also they can
move very quietly, and hide easily, and recover
wonderfully from falls and bruises, and they
have a fund of wisdom and wise sayings that
men have mostly never heard or have forgotten
long ago.

I should not have liked to have been in Mr.
Baggins’ place, all the same. The tunnel
seemed to have no end. All he knew was that it
was still going down pretty steadily and keeping
in the same direction in spite of a twist and a
turn or two. There were passages leading off to
the side every now and then, as he knew by the
glimmer of his sword, or could feel with his hand
on the wall. Of these he took no notice, except
to hurry past for fear of goblins or half-imagined
dark things coming out of them. On and on he
went, and down and down; and still he heard no
sound of anything except the occasional whirr of
a bat by his ears, which startled him at first, till it
became too frequent to bother about. I do not
know how long he kept on like this, hating to go
on, not daring to stop, on, on, until he was
tireder than tired. It seemed like all the way to
tomorrow and over it to the days beyond.

Suddenly without any warning he trotted

splash into water! Ugh! it was icy cold. That
pulled him up sharp and short. He did not know
whether it was just a pool in the path, or the
edge of an underground stream that crossed
the passage, or the brink of a deep dark
subterranean lake. The sword was hardly
shining at all. He stopped, and he could hear,
when he listened hard, drops drip-drip-dripping
from an unseen roof into the water below; but
there seemed no other sort of sound.

“So it is a pool or a lake, and not an
underground river,” he thought. Still he did not
dare to wade out into the darkness. He could
not swim; and he thought, too, of nasty slimy
things, with big bulging blind eyes, wriggling in
the water. There are strange things living in the
pools and lakes in the hearts of mountains: fish
whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows
how many years ago, and never swam out
again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger
and bigger from trying to see in the blackness;
also there are other things more slimy than fish.
Even in the tunnels and caves the goblins have
made for themselves there are other things
living unbeknown to them that have sneaked in
from outside to lie up in the dark. Some of
these caves, too, go back in their beginnings to
ages before the goblins, who only widened
them and joined them up with passages, and

the original owners are still there in odd
corners, slinking and nosing about.

Deep down here by the dark water lived old
Gollum, a small slimy creature. I don’t know
where he came from, nor who or what he was.
He was Gollum — as dark as darkness, except
for two big round pale eyes in his thin face. He
had a little boat, and he rowed about quite
quietly on the lake; for lake it was, wide and
deep and deadly cold. He paddled it with large
feet dangling over the side, but never a ripple
did he make. Not he. He was looking out of his
pale lamp-like eyes for blind fish, which he
grabbed with his long fingers as quick as
thinking. He liked meat too. Goblin he thought
good, when he could get it; but he took care
they never found him out. He just throttled them
from behind, if they ever came down alone
anywhere near the edge of the water, while he
was prowling about. They very seldom did, for
they had a feeling that something unpleasant
was lurking down there, down at the very roots
of the mountain. They had come on the lake,
when they were tunnelling down long ago, and
they found they could go no further; so there
their road ended in that direction, and there was
no reason to go that way — unless the Great
Goblin sent them. Sometimes he took a fancy
for fish from the lake, and sometimes neither

goblin nor fish came back.

Actually Gollum lived on a slimy island of
rock in the middle of the lake. He was watching
Bilbo now from the distance with his pale eyes
like telescopes. Bilbo could not see him, but he
was wondering a lot about Bilbo, for he could
see that he was no goblin at all.

Gollum got into his boat and shot off from
the island, while Bilbo was sitting on the brink
altogether flummoxed and at the end of his way
and his wits. Suddenly up came Gollum and
whispered and hissed:

“Bless us and splash us, my precioussss! I
guess it’s a choice feast; at least a tasty morsel
it’d make us, gollum!”And when he said gollum
he made a horrible swallowing noise in his
throat. That is how he got his name, though he
always called himself ‘my precious’.

The hobbit jumped nearly out of his skin
when the hiss came in his ears, and he
suddenly saw the pale eyes sticking out at him.

“Who are you?” he said, thrusting his
dagger in front of him.

“What iss he, my preciouss?” whispered
Gollum (who always spoke to himself through
never having anyone else to speak to). This is
what he had come to find out, for he was not
really very hungry at the moment, only curious;
otherwise he would have grabbed first and

whispered afterwards.

“I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins. I have lost the
dwarves and I have lost the wizard, and I don’t
know where I am; and I don’t want to know, if
only I can get away.”

“What’s he got in his handses?” said
Gollum, looking at the sword, which he did not
quite like.

“A sword, a blade which came out of
Gondolin!”

“Sssss” said Gollum, and became quite
polite. “Praps ye sits here and chats with it a
bitsy, my preciousss. It likes riddles, praps it
does, does it?” He was anxious to appear
friendly, at any rate for the moment, and until he
found out more about the sword and the hobbit,
whether he was quite alone really, whether he
was good to eat, and whether Gollum was really
hungry. Riddles were all he could think of.
Asking them, and sometimes guessing them,
had been the only game he had ever played
with other funny creatures sitting in their holes in
the long, long ago, before he lost all his friends
and was driven away, alone, and crept down,
down, into the dark under the mountains.

“Very well,” said Bilbo, who was anxious to
agree, until he found out more about the
creature, whether he was quite alone, whether
he was fierce or hungry, and whether he was a

friend of the goblins.

“You ask first,” he said, because he had not
had time to think of a riddle.

So Gollum hissed:

What has roots as nobody sees,
Is taller than trees,

Up, up it goes,

And yet never grows?

“Easy!” said Bilbo. “Mountain, I suppose.”

“Does it guess easy? It must have a
competition with us, my preciouss! If precious
asks, and it doesn’t answer, we eats it, my
preciousss. If it asks us, and we doesn’t
answer, then we does what it wants, eh? We
shows it the way out, yes!”

“All right!” said Bilbo, not daring to
disagree, and nearly bursting his brain to think
of riddles that could save him from being eaten.

Thirty white horses on a red hill,
First they champ,

Then they stamp,

Then they stand still.

That was all he could think of to ask — the
idea of eating was rather on his mind. It was
rather an old one, too, and Gollum knew the
answer as well as you do.

“Chestnuts, chestnuts,” he hissed. “Teeth!
teeth! my preciousss; but we has only six!” Then
he asked his second:

Voiceless it cries,
Wingless flutters,
Toothless bites,
Mouthless mutters.

“Half a moment!” cried Bilbo, who was still
thinking uncomfortably about eating. Fortunately
he had once heard something rather like this
before, and getting his wits back he thought of
the answer. “Wind, wind of course,” he said,
and he was so pleased that he made up one on
the spot. “This’ll puzzle the nasty little
underground creature,” he thought:

An eye in a blue face
Sawan eye in a green face.
“That eye is like to this eye”
Said the first eye,

“Butin tow place
Notin high place.”

“Ss, ss, ss,” said Gollum. He had been
underground a long long time, and was
forgetting this sort of thing. But just as Bilbo was
beginning to hope that the wretch would not be
able to answer, Gollum brought up memories of
ages and ages and ages before, when he lived
with his grandmother in a hole in a bank by a
river, “Sss, sss, my preciouss,” he said. “Sun on
the daisies it means, it does.”

But these ordinary above ground everyday
sort of riddles were tiring for him. Also they
reminded him of days when he had been less
lonely and sneaky and nasty, and that put him
out of temper. What is more they made him
hungry; so this time he tried something a bit
more difficult and more unpleasant:

It cannot be seen, cannot be felt,
Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt.
It lies behind stars and Underhills,
And empty holes it fills.

It comes first and follows after,
Ends life, kills laughter.

Unfortunately for Gollum Bilbo had heard
that sort of thing before; and the answer was all
round him anyway. “Dark!” he said without even
scratching his head or putting on his thinking
cap.

A box without hinges, key, or lid,
Yet golden treasure inside is hid,

he asked to gain time, until he could think of a
really hard one. This he thought a dreadfully
easy chestnut, though he had not asked it in the
usual words. But it proved a nasty poser for
Gollum. He hissed to himself, and still he did not
answer; he whispered and spluttered.

After some while Bilbo became impatient.
“Well, what is it?” he said. “The answer’s not a
kettle boiling over, as you seem to think from
the noise you are making.”

“Give us a chance; let it give us a chance,
my preciouss — ss — ss.”

“Well,” said Bilbo after giving him a long
chance, “what about your guess?”

But suddenly Gollum remembered thieving
from nests long ago, and sitting under the river

bank teaching his grandmother, teaching his
grandmother to suck — “Eggses!” he hissed.
“Eggses it is!” Then he asked:

Alive without breath,

As cold as death;

Never thirsty, ever drinking,
All in mail never clinking.

He also in his turn thought this was a
dreadfully easy one, because he was always
thinking of the answer. But he could not
remember anything better at the moment, he
was so flustered by the egg-question. All the
same it was a poser for poor Bilbo, who never
had anything to do with the water if he could
help it. I imagine you know the answer, of
course, or can guess it as easy as winking,
since you are sitting comfortably at home and
have not the danger of being eaten to disturb
your thinking. Bilbo sat and cleared his throat
once or twice, but no answer came.

After a while Gollum began to hiss with
pleasure to himself: “Is it nice, my preciousss?
Is it juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?” He
began to peer at Bilbo out of the darkness.

“Half a moment,” said the hobbit shivering.

“I gave you a good long chance just now.”

“It must make haste, haste!” said Gollum,
beginning to climb out of his boat on to the
shore to get at Bilbo. But when he put his long
webby foot in the water, a fish jumped out in a
fright and fell on Bilbo’s toes.

“Ugh!” he said, “it is cold and clammy!” —
and so he guessed. “Fish! fish!” he cried. “It is
fish!”

Gollum was dreadfully disappointed; but
Bilbo asked another riddle as quick as ever he
could, so that Gollum had to get back into his
boat and think.

No-legs lay on one-leg, two-legs sat near
on three-legs, four-legs got some.

It was not really the right time for this riddle,
but Bilbo was in a hurry. Gollum might have had
some trouble guessing it, if he had asked it at
another time. As it was, talking offish, “no-legs”
was not so very difficult, and after that the rest
was easy. “Fish on a little table, man at table
sitting on a stool, the cat has the bones” that of
course is the answer, and Gollum soon gave it.
Then he thought the time had come to ask
something hard and horrible. This is what he
said:

This thing all things devours:

Birds, beasts, trees, flowers;
Gnaws iron, bites steel;

Grinds hard stones to meal;
Slays king, ruins town,

And beats high mountain down.

Poor Bilbo sat in the dark thinking of all the
horrible names of all the giants and ogres he
had ever heard told of in tales, but not one of
them had done all these things. He had a
feeling that the answer was quite different and
that he ought to know it, but he could not think of
it. He began to get frightened, and that is bad
for thinking. Gollum began to get out of his boat.
He flapped into the water and paddled to the
bank; Bilbo could see his eyes coming towards
him. His tongue seemed to stick in his mouth;
he wanted to shout out: “Give me more time!
Give me time!” But all that came out with a
sudden squeal was:

“Time! Time!”

Bilbo was saved by pure luck. For that of
course was the answer.

Gollum was disappointed once more; and
now he was getting angry, and also tired of the
game. It had made him very hungry indeed. This

time he did not go back to the boat. He sat
down in the dark by Bilbo. That made the hobbit
most dreadfully uncomfortable and scattered
his wits.

“It’s got to ask uss a quesstion, my
preciouss, yes, yess, yesss. Jusst one more
question to guess, yes, yess,” said Gollum.

But Bilbo simply could not think of any
question with that nasty wet cold thing sitting
next to him, and pawing and poking him. He
scratched himself, he pinched himself; still he
could not think of anything.

“Ask us! ask us!” said Gollum.

Bilbo pinched himself and slapped himself;
he gripped on his little sword; he even felt in his
pocket with his other hand. There he found the
ring he had picked up in the passage and
forgotten about.

“What have I got in my pocket?” he said
aloud. He was talking to himself, but Gollum
thought it was a riddle, and he was frightfully
upset.

"Not fair! not fair!” he hissed. “It isn’t fair, my
precious, is it, to ask us what it’s got in its
nassty little pocketses?”

Bilbo seeing what had happened and
having nothing better to ask stuck to his
question, “What have I got in my pocket?” he
said louder.

“S-s-s-s-s,” hissed Gollum. “It must give us
three guesseses, my preciouss, three
guesseses.”

“Very well! Guess away!” said Bilbo.

“Handses!” said Gollum.

“Wrong,” said Bilbo, who had luckily just
taken his hand out again. “Guess again!”

“S-s-s-s-s,” said Gollum more upset than
ever. He thought of all the things he kept in his
own pockets: fish-bones, goblins’ teeth, wet
shells, a bit of bat-wing, a sharp stone to
sharpen his fangs on, and other nasty things.
He tried to think what other people kept in their
pockets.

“Knife!” he said at last.

“Wrong!” said Bilbo, who had lost his some
time ago. “Last guess!”

Now Gollum was in a much worse state
than when Bilbo had asked him the egg-
question. He hissed and spluttered and rocked
himself backwards and forwards, and slapped
his feet on the floor, and wriggled and
squirmed; but still he did not dare to waste his
last guess.

“Come on!” said Bilbo. “I am waiting!” He
tried to sound bold and cheerful, but he did not
feel at all sure how the game was going to end,
whether Gollum guessed right or not.

“Time’s up!” he said.

“String, or nothing!” shrieked Gollum, which
was not quite fair — working in two guesses at
once.

“Both wrong,” cried Bilbo very much
relieved; and he jumped at once to his feet, put
his back to the nearest wall, and held out his
little sword. He knew, of course, that the riddle-
game was sacred and of immense antiquity,
and even wicked creatures were afraid to cheat
when they played at it. But he felt he could not
trust this slimy thing to keep any promise at a
pinch. Any excuse would do for him to slide out
of it. And after all that last question had not
been a genuine riddle according to the ancient
laws.

But at any rate Gollum did not at once
attack him. He could see the sword in Bilbo’s
hand. He sat still, shivering and whispering. At
last Bilbo could wait no longer.

“Well?” he said. “What about your promise?
I want to go. You must show me the way.”

“Did we say so, precious? Show the nassty
little Baggins the way out, yes, yes. But what
has it got in its pocketses, eh? Not string,
precious, but not nothing. Oh no! gollum!”

"Never you mind,” said Bilbo. “A promise is
a promise.”

“Cross it is, impatient, precious,” hissed
Gollum. “But it must wait, yes it must. We can’t

go up the tunnels so hasty. We must go and get
some things first, yes, things to help us.”

“Well, hurry up!” said Bilbo, relieved to think
of Gollum going away. He thought he was just
making an excuse and did not mean to come
back. What was Gollum talking about? What
useful thing could he keep out on the dark lake?
But he was wrong. Gollum did mean to come
back. He was angry now and hungry. And he
was a miserable wicked creature, and already
he had a plan.

Not far away was his island, of which Bilbo
knew nothing, and there in his hiding-place he
kept a few wretched oddments, and one very
beautiful thing, very beautiful, very wonderful. He
had a ring, a golden ring, a precious ring.

“My birthday-present!” he whispered to
himself, as he had often done in the endless
dark days. “That’s what we wants now, yes; we
wants it!”

He wanted it because it was a ring of
power, and if you slipped that ring on your
finger, you were invisible; only in the full sunlight
could you be seen, and then only by your
shadow, and that would be shaky and faint.

“My birthday-present! It came to me on my
birthday, my precious.” So he had always said
to himself. But who knows how Gollum came by
that present, ages ago in the old days when

such rings were still at large in the world?
Perhaps even the Master who ruled them could
not have said. Gollum used to wear it at first, till
it tired him; and then he kept it in a pouch next
his skin, till it galled him; and now usually he hid
it in a hole in the rock on his island, and was
always going back to look at it. And still
sometimes he put it on, when he could not bear
to be parted from it any longer, or when he was
very, very, hungry, and tired of fish. Then he
would creep along dark passages looking for
stray goblins. He might even venture into places
where the torches were lit and made his eyes
blink and smart; for he would be safe. Oh yes,
quite safe. No one would see him, no one would
notice him, till he had his fingers on their throat.
Only a few hours ago he had worn it, and caught
a small goblin-imp. How it squeaked! He still
had a bone or two left to gnaw, but he wanted
something softer.

“Quite safe, yes,” he whispered to himself.
“It won’t see us, will it, my precious? No. It won’t
see us, and its nassty little sword will be
useless, yes quite.”

That is what was in his wicked little mind, as
he slipped suddenly from Bilbo’s side, and
flapped back to his boat, and went off into the
dark. Bilbo thought he had heard the last of him.
Still he waited a while; for he had no idea how

to find his way out alone.

Suddenly he heard a screech. It sent a
shiver down his back. Gollum was cursing and
wailing away in the gloom, not very far off by the
sound of it. He was on his island, scrabbling
here and there, searching and seeking in vain.

“Where iss it? Where iss it?” Bilbo heard
him crying. “Losst it is, my precious, lost, lost!
Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!”

“What’s the matter?” Bilbo called. “What
have you lost?”

“It mustn’t ask us,” shrieked Gollum. "Not its
business, no, gollum! It’s losst, gollum, gollum,
gollum.”

“Well, so am I,” cried Bilbo, “and I want to
get unlost. And I won the game, and you
promised. So come along! Come and let me
out, and then go on with your looking!” Utterly
miserable as Gollum sounded, Bilbo could not
find much pity in his heart, and he had a feeling
that anything Gollum wanted so much could
hardly be something good. “Come along!” he
shouted.

“No, not yet, precious!” Gollum answered.
“We must search for it, it’s lost, gollum.”

“But you never guessed my last question,
and you promised,” said Bilbo.

"Never guessed!” said Gollum. Then
suddenly out of the gloom came a sharp hiss.

“What has it got in its pocketses? Tell us that. It
must tell first.”

As far as Bilbo knew, there was no
particular reason why he should not tell.
Gollum’s mind had jumped to a guess quicker
than his; naturally, for Gollum had brooded for
ages on this one thing, and he was always
afraid of its being stolen. But Bilbo was
annoyed at the delay. After all, he had won the
game, pretty fairly, at a horrible risk. “Answers
were to be guessed not given,” he said.

“But it wasn’t a fair question,” said Gollum.
“Not a riddle, precious, no.”

“Oh well, if it’s a matter of ordinary
questions,” Bilbo replied, “then I asked one first.
What have you lost? Tell me that!”

“What has it got in its pocketses?” The
sound came hissing louder and sharper, and as
he looked towards it, to his alarm Bilbo now
saw two small points of light peering at him. As
suspicion grew in Gollum’s mind, the light of his
eyes burned with a pale flame.

“What have you lost?” Bilbo persisted.

But now the light in Gollum’s eyes had
become a green fire, and it was coming swiftly
nearer. Gollum was in his boat again, paddling
wildly back to the dark shore; and such a rage
of loss and suspicion was in his heart that no
sword had any more terror for him.

Bilbo could not guess what had maddened
the wretched creature, but he saw that all was
up, and that Gollum meant to murder him at any
rate. Just in time he turned and ran blindly back
up the dark passage down which he had come,
keeping close to the wall and feeling it with his
left hand.

“What has it got in its pocketses?” he heard
the hiss loud behind him, and the splash as
Gollum leapt from his boat. “What have I, I
wonder?” he said to himself, as he panted and
stumbled along. He put his left hand in his
pocket. The ring felt very cold as it quietly
slipped on to his groping forefinger.

The hiss was close behind him. He turned
now and saw Gollum’s eyes like small green
lamps coming up the slope. Terrified he tried to
run faster, but suddenly he struck his toes on a
snag in the floor, and fell flat with his little sword
under him.

In a moment Gollum was on him. But before
Bilbo could do anything, recover his breath,
pick himself up, or wave his sword, Gollum
passed by, taking no notice of him, cursing and
whispering as he ran.

What could it mean? Gollum could see in
the dark. Bilbo could see the light of his eyes
palely shining even from behind. Painfully he got
up, and sheathed his sword, which was now

glowing faintly again, then very cautiously he
followed. There seemed nothing else to do. It
was no good crawling back down to Gollum’s
water. Perhaps if he followed him, Gollum might
lead him to some way of escape without
meaning to.

“Curse it! curse it! curse it!” hissed Gollum.
“Curse the Baggins! It’s gone! What has it got
in its pocketses? Oh we guess, we guess, my
precious. He’s found it, yes he must have. My
birthday-present.”

Bilbo pricked up his ears. He was at last
beginning to guess himself. He hurried a little,
getting as close as he dared behind Gollum,
who was still going quickly, not looking back,
but turning his head from side to side, as Bilbo
could see from the faint glimmer on the walls.

“My birthday-present! Curse it! How did we
lose it, my precious? Yes, that’s it. When we
came this way last, when we twisted that nassty
young squeaker. That’s it. Curse it! It slipped
from us, after all these ages and ages! It’s
gone, gollum."

Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to
weep, a whistling and gurgling sound horrible to
listen to. Bilbo halted and flattened himself
against the tunnel-wall. After a while Gollum
stopped weeping and began to talk. He
seemed to be having an argument with himself.

“It’s no good going back there to search,
no. We doesn’t remember all the places we’ve
visited. And it’s no use. The Baggins has got it
in its pocketses; the nassty noser has found it,
we says."

“We guesses, precious, only guesses. We
can’t know till we find the nassty creature and
squeezes it. But it doesn’t know what the
present can do, does it? It’ll just keep it in its
pocketses. It doesn’t know, and it can’t go far.
It’s lost itself, the nassty nosey thing. It doesn’t
know the way out. It said so.”

“It said so, yes; but it’s tricksy. It doesn’t say
what it means. It won’t say what it’s got in its
pocketses. It knows. It knows a way in, it must
know a way out, yes. It’s off to the back-door. To
the back-door, that’s it.”

“The goblinses will catch it then. It can’t get
out that way, precious.”

“Ssss, sss, gollum! Goblinses! Yes, but if
it’s got the present, our precious present, then
goblinses will get it, gollum! They’ll find it, they’ll
find out what it does. We shan’t ever be safe
again, never, gollum! One of the goblinses will
put it on, and then no one will see him. He’ll be
there but not seen. Not even our clever eyeses
will notice him; and he’ll come creepsy and
tricksy and catch us, gollum, gollum!”

“Then let’s stop talking, precious, and make

haste, tf the Baggins has gone that way, we
must go quick and see. Go! Not far now. Make
haste!”

With a spring Gollum got up and started
shambling off at a great pace. Bilbo hurried
after him, still cautiously, though his chief fear
now was of tripping on another snag and falling
with a noise. His head was in a whirl of hope
and wonder. It seemed that the ring he had was
a magic ring: it made you invisible! He had
heard of such things, of course, in old old tales;
but it was hard to believe that he really had
found one, by accident. Still there it was: Gollum
with his bright eyes had passed him by, only a
yard to one side.

On they went, Gollum flip-flapping ahead,
hissing and cursing; Bilbo behind going as
softly as a hobbit can. Soon they came to
places where, as Bilbo had noticed on the way
down, side-passages opened, this way and
that. Gollum began at once to count them.

“One left, yes. One right, yes. Two right, yes,
yes. Two left, yes, yes.” And so on and on.

As the count grew he slowed down, and he
began to get shaky and weepy; for he was
leaving the water further and further behind, and
he was getting afraid. Goblins might be about,
and he had lost his ring. At last he stopped by a
low opening, on their left as they went up.

“Seven right, yes. Six left, yes!” he
whispered. “This is it. This is the way to the
back-door, yes. Here’s the passage!”

He peered in, and shrank back. “But we
dursn’t go in, precious, no we dursn’t.
Goblinses down there. Lots of goblinses. We
smells them. Ssss!”

“What shall we do? Curse them and crush
them! We must wait here, precious, wait a bit
and see.”

So they came to a dead stop. Gollum had
brought Bilbo to the way out after all, but Bilbo
could not get in! There was Gollum sitting
humped up right in the opening, and his eyes
gleamed cold in his head, as he swayed it from
side to side between his knees.

Bilbo crept away from the wall more quietly
than a mouse; but Gollum stiffened at once, and
sniffed, and his eyes went green. He hissed
softly but menacingly. He could not see the
hobbit, but now he was on the alert, and he had
other senses that the darkness had sharpened:
hearing and smell. He seemed to be crouched
right down with his flat hands splayed on the
floor, and his head thrust out, nose almost to the
stone. Though he was only a black shadow in
the gleam of his own eyes, Bilbo could see or
feel that he was tense as a bowstring, gathered
for a spring.

Bilbo almost stopped breathing, and went
stiff himself. He was desperate. He must get
away, out of this horrible darkness, while he had
any strength left. He must fight. He must stab
the foul thing, put its eyes out, kill it. It meant to
kill him. No, not a fair fight. He was invisible
now. Gollum had no sword. Gollum had not
actually threatened to kill him, or tried to yet.
And he was miserable, alone, lost. A sudden
understanding, a pity mixed with horror, welled
up in Bilbo’s heart: a glimpse of endless
unmarked days without light or hope of
betterment, hard stone, cold fish, sneaking and
whispering. All these thoughts passed in a flash
of a second. He trembled. And then quite
suddenly in another flash, as if lifted by a new
strength and resolve, he leaped.

No great leap for a man, but a leap in the
dark. Straight over Gollum’s head he jumped,
seven feet forward and three in the air; indeed,
had he known it, he only just missed cracking
his skull on the low arch of the passage.

Gollum threw himself backwards, and
grabbed as the hobbit flew over him, but too
late: his hands snapped on thin air, and Bilbo,
falling fair on his sturdy feet, sped off down the
new tunnel. He did not turn to see what Gollum
was doing. There was a hissing and cursing
almost at his heels at first, then it stopped. All at

once there came a blood-curdling shriek, filled
with hatred and despair. Gollum was defeated.
He dared go no further. He had lost: lost his
prey, and lost, too, the only thing he had ever
cared for, his precious. The cry brought Bilbo’s
heart to his mouth, but still he held on. Now faint
as an echo, but menacing, the voice came
behind:

“Thief, thief, thief! Bag gins! We hates it, we
hates it, we hates it for ever!”

Then there was a silence. But that too
seemed menacing to Bilbo. “If goblins are so
near that he smelt them,” he thought, “then they’ll
have heard his shrieking and cursing. Careful
now, or this way will lead you to worse things.”

The passage was low and roughly made. It
was not too difficult for the hobbit, except when,
in spite of all care, he stubbed his poor toes
again, several times, on nasty jagged stones in
the floor. “A bit low for goblins, at least for the
big ones,” thought Bilbo, not knowing that even
the big ones, the ores of the mountains, go
along at a great speed stooping low with their
hands almost on the ground.

Soon the passage that had been sloping
down began to go up again, and after a while it
climbed steeply. That slowed Bilbo down. But at
last the slope stopped, the passage turned a
corner and dipped down again, and there, at

the bottom of a short incline, he saw, filtering
round another corner — a glimpse of light. Not
red light, as of fire or lantern, but a pale out-of-
doors sort of light. Then Bilbo began to run.

Scuttling as fast as his legs would carry him
he turned the last corner and came suddenly
right into an open space, where the light, after
all that time in the dark, seemed dazzlingly
bright. Really it was only a leak of sunshine in
through a doorway, where a great door, a stone
door, was left standing open.

Bilbo blinked, and then suddenly he saw the
goblins: goblins in full armour with drawn
swords sitting just inside the door, and watching
it with wide eyes, and watching the passage
that led to it. They were aroused, alert, ready for
anything.

They saw him sooner than he saw them.
Yes, they saw him. Whether it was an accident,
or a last trick of the ring before it took a new
master, it was not on his finger. With yells of
delight the goblins rushed upon him.

A pang of fear and loss, like an echo of
Gollum’s misery, smote Bilbo, and forgetting
even to draw his sword he struck his hands into
his pockets. And there was the ring still, in his
left pocket, and it slipped on his finger. The
goblins stopped short. They could not see a
sign of him. He had vanished. They yelled twice

as loud as before, but not so delightedly.

“Where is it?” they cried.

“Go back up the passage!” some shouted.

“This way!” some yelled. “That way!” others
yelled.

“Look out for the door,” bellowed the
captain.

Whistles blew, armour clashed, swords
rattled, goblins cursed and swore and ran hither
and thither, falling over one another and getting
very angry. There was a terrible outcry, to-do,
and disturbance.

Bilbo was dreadfully frightened, but he had
the sense to understand what had happened
and to sneak behind a big barrel which held
drink for the goblin-guards, and so get out of the
way and avoid being bumped into, trampled to
death, or caught by feel.

“I must get to the door, I must get to the
door!” he kept on saying to himself, but it was a
long time before he ventured to try. Then it was
like a horrible game of blind-man’s-buff. The
place was full of goblins running about, and the
poor little hobbit dodged this way and that, was
knocked over by a goblin who could not make
out what he had bumped into, scrambled away
on all fours, slipped between the legs of the
captain just in time, got up, and ran for the door.

It was still ajar, but a goblin had pushed it

nearly to. Bilbo struggled but he could not move
it. He tried to squeeze through the crack. He
squeezed and squeezed, and he stuck! It was
awful. His buttons had got wedged on the edge
of the door and the door-post. He could see
outside into the open air: there were a few
steps running down into a narrow valley
between tall mountains; the sun came out from
behind a cloud and shone bright on the outside
of the door — but he could not get through.

Suddenly one of the goblins inside shouted:
“There is a shadow by the door. Something is
outside!”

Bilbo’s heart jumped into his mouth. He
gave a terrific squirm. Buttons burst off in all
directions. He was through, with a torn coat and
waistcoat, leaping down the steps like a goat,
while bewildered goblins were still picking up
his nice brass buttons on the doorstep.

Of course they soon came down after him,
hooting and hallooing, and hunting among the
trees. But they don’t like the sun: it makes their
legs wobble and their heads giddy. They could
not find Bilbo with the ring on, slipping in and
out of the shadow of the trees, running quick
and quiet, and keeping out of the sun; so soon
they went back grumbling and cursing to guard
the door. Bilbo had escaped.

Chapter VI

OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO

THE FIRE

Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not
know where he was. He had lost hood, cloak,
food, pony, his buttons and his friends. He
wandered on and on, till the sun began to sink
westwards — behind the mountains. Their
shadows fell across Bilbo’s path, and he looked
back. Then he looked forward and could see
before him only ridges and slopes falling
towards lowlands and plains glimpsed
occasionally between the trees.

“Good heavens!” he exclaimed. “I seem to
have got right to the other side of the Misty
Mountains, right to the edge of the Land
Beyond! Where and O where can Gandalf and
the dwarves have got to? I only hope to
goodness they are not still back there in the
power of the goblins!”

He still wandered on, out of the little high
valley, over its edge, and down the slopes
beyond; but all the while a very uncomfortable

thought was growing inside him. He wondered
whether he ought not, now he had the magic
ring, to go back into the horrible, horrible,
tunnels and look for his friends. He had just
made up his mind that it was his duty, that he
must turn back — and very miserable he felt
about it — when he heard voices.

He stopped and listened. It did not sound
like goblins; so he crept forward carefully. He
was on a stony path winding downwards with a
rocky wall on the left hand; on the other side the
ground sloped away and there were dells below
the level of the path overhung with bushes and
low trees. In one of these dells under the bushes
people were talking.

He crept still nearer, and suddenly he saw
peering between two big boulders a head with
a red hood on: it was Balin doing look-out. He
could have clapped and shouted for joy, but he
did not. He had still got the ring on, for fear of
meeting something unexpected and
unpleasant, and he saw that Balin was looking
straight at him without noticing him.

“I will give them all a surprise,” he thought,
as he crawled into the bushes at the edge of the
dell. Gandalf was arguing with the dwarves.
They were discussing all that had happened to
them in the tunnels, and wondering and
debating what they were to do now. The
dwarves were grumbling, and Gandalf was
saying that they could not possibly go on with

their journey leaving Mr. Baggins in the hands of
the goblins, without trying to find out if he was
alive or dead, and without trying to rescue him.

“After all he is my friend,” said the wizard,
“and not a bad little chap. I feel responsible for
him. I wish to goodness you had not lost him.”

The dwarves wanted to know why he had
ever been brought at all, why he could not stick
to his friends and come along with them, and
why the wizard had not chosen someone with
more sense. “He has been more trouble than
use so far,” said one. “If we have got to go back
now into those abominable tunnels to look for
him, then drat him, I say.”

Gandalf answered angrily: “I brought him,
and I don’t bring things that are of no use. Either
you help me to look for him, or I go and leave
you here to get out of the mess as best you can
yourselves. If we can only find him again, you
will thank me before all is over. Whatever did
you want to go and drop him for, Dori?”

“You would have dropped him,” said Dori,
“if a goblin had suddenly grabbed your legs
from behind in the dark, tripped up your feet,
and kicked you in the back!”

“Then why didn’t you pick him up again?”

“Good heavens! Can you ask! Goblins
fighting and biting in the dark, everybody falling
over bodies and hitting one another! You nearly
chopped off my head with Glamdring, and
Thorin was stabbing here there and everywhere

with Orcrist. All of a sudden you gave one of
your blinding flashes, and we saw the goblins
running back yelping. You shouted ‘follow me
everybody!' and everybody ought to have
followed. We thought everybody had. There was
no time to count, as you know quite well, till we
had dashed through the gate-guards, out of the
lower door, and helter-skelter down here. And
here we are — without the burglar, confusticate
him!”

“And here’s the burglar!” said Bilbo
stepping down into the middle of them, and
slipping off the ring.

Bless me, how they jumped! Then they
shouted with surprise and delight. Gandalf was
as astonished as any of them, but probably
more pleased than all the others. He called to
Balin and told him what he thought of a look-out
man who let people walk right into them like that
without warning. It is a fact that Bilbo’s
reputation went up a very great deal with the
dwarves after this. If they had still doubted that
he was really a first-class burglar, in spite of
Gandalf s words, they doubted no longer. Balin
was the most puzzled of all; but everyone said it
was a very clever bit of work.

Indeed Bilbo was so pleased with their
praise that he just chuckled inside and said
nothing whatever about the ring; and when they
asked him how he did it, he said: “Oh, just crept
along, you know — very carefully and quietly.”

“Well, It is the first time that even a mouse
has crept along carefully and quietly under my
very nose and not been spotted,” said Balin,
“and I take off my hood to you.” Which he did.

“Balin at your service,” said he.

“Your servant, Mr. Baggins,” said Bilbo.

Then they wanted to know all about his
adventures after they had lost him, and he sat
down and told them everything — except about
the finding of the ring (“not just now” he thought).
They were particularly interested in the riddle-
competition, and shuddered most
appreciatively at his description of Gollum.

“And then I couldn’t think of any other
question with him sitting beside me,” ended
Bilbo; “so I said ‘what’s in my pocket?’ And he
couldn’t guess in three goes. So I said: ‘what
about your promise? Show me the way out!’ But
he came at me to kill me, and I ran, and fell
over, and he missed me in the dark. Then I
followed him, because I heard him talking to
himself. He thought I really knew the way out,
and so he was making for it. And then he sat
down in the entrance, and I could not get by. So
I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down
to the gate.”

“What about the guards?” they asked.
“Weren’t there any?”

“O yes! lots of them; but I dodged ’em. I got
stuck in the door, which was only open a crack,
and I lost lots of buttons,” he said sadly looking

at his torn clothes. “But I squeezed through all
right — and here lam.”

The dwarves looked at him with quite a new
respect, when he talked about dodging guards,
jumping over Gollum, and squeezing through,
as if it was not very difficult or very alarming.

“What did I tell you?” said Gandalf laughing.
“Mr. Baggins has more about him than you
guess.” He gave Bilbo a queer look from under
his bushy eyebrows, as he said this, and the
hobbit wondered if he guessed at the part of his
tale that he had left out.

Then he had questions of his own to ask, for
if Gandalf had explained it all by now to the
dwarves, Bilbo had not heard it. He wanted to
know how the wizard had turned up again, and
where they had all got to now.

The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded
explaining his cleverness more than once, so
now he told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had
been well aware of the presence of evil goblins
in that part of the mountains. But their main gate
used to come out on a different pass, one more
easy to travel by, so that they often caught
people benighted near their gates. Evidently
people had given up going that way, and the
goblins must have opened their new entrance at
the top of the pass the dwarves had taken, quite
recently, because it had been found quite safe
up to now.

“I must see if I can’t find a more or less

decent giant to block it up again,” said Gandalf,
‘‘or soon there will be no getting over the
mountains at all.”

As soon as Gandalf had heard Bilbo’s yell
he realized what had happened. In the flash
which killed the goblins that were grabbing him
he had nipped inside the crack, just as it
snapped to. He followed after the drivers and
prisoners right to the edge of the great hall, and
there he sat down and worked up the best
magic he could in the shadows.

“A very ticklish business, it was,” he said.
‘‘Touch and go!”

But, of course, Gandalf had made a special
study of bewitchments with fire and lights (even
the hobbit had never forgotten the magic
fireworks at Old Took’s midsummer-eve
parties, as you remember). The rest we all
know — except that Gandalf knew all about the
back-door, as the goblins called the lower gate,
where Bilbo lost his buttons. As a matter of fact
it was well known to anybody who was
acquainted with this part of the mountains; but it
took a wizard to keep his head in the tunnels
and guide them in the right direction.

“They made that gate ages ago,” he said,
“partly for a way of escape, if they needed one;
partly as a way out into the lands beyond, where
they still come in the dark and do great
damage. They guard it always and no one has
ever managed to block it up. They will guard it

doubly after this,” he laughed.

All the others laughed too. After all they had
lost a good deal, but they had killed the Great
Goblin and a great many others besides, and
they had all escaped, so they might be said to
have had the best of it so far.

But the wizard called them to their senses.
‘‘We must be getting on at once, now we are a
little rested,” he said. “They will be out after us in
hundreds when night comes on; and already
shadows are lengthening. They can smell our
footsteps for hours and hours after we have
passed. We must be miles on before dusk.
There will be a bit of moon, if it keeps fine, and
that is lucky. Not that they mind the moon much,
but it will give us a little light to steer by.”

“O yes!” he said in answer to more
questions from the hobbit. “You lose track of
time inside goblin-tunnels. Today’s Thursday,
and it was Monday night or Tuesday morning
that we were captured. We have gone miles
and miles, and come right down through the
heart of the mountains, and are now on the
other side — quite a short cut. But we are not at
the point to which our pass would have brought
us; we are too far to the North, and have some
awkward country ahead. And we are still pretty
high up. Let’s get on!”

“I am dreadfully hungry,” groaned Bilbo, who
was suddenly aware that he had not had a meal
since the night before the night before last. Just

think of that for a hobbit! His stomach felt all
empty and loose and his legs all wobbly, now
that the excitement was over.

“Can't help it,’’ said Gandalf, “unless you like
to go back and ask the goblins nicely to let you
have your pony back and your luggage.”

“No thank you!” said Bilbo.

“Very well then, we must just tighten our
belts and trudge on — or we shall be made into
supper, and that will be much worse than having
none ourselves.”

As they went on Bilbo looked from side to
side for something to eat; but the blackberries
were still only in flower, and of course there
were no nuts, not even hawthorn-berries. He
nibbled a bit of sorrel, and he drank from a
small mountain-stream that crossed the path,
and he ate three wild strawberries that he found
on its bank, but it was not much good.

They still went on and on. The rough path
disappeared. The bushes, and the long
grasses between the boulders, the patches of
rabbit-cropped turf, the thyme and the sage and
the marjoram, and the yellow rockroses all
vanished, and they found themselves at the top
of a wide steep slope of fallen stones, the
remains of a landslide. When they began to go
down this, rubbish and small pebbles rolled
away from their feet; soon larger bits of split
stone went clattering down and started other
pieces below them slithering and rolling; then

lumps of rock were disturbed and bounded off,
crashing down with a dust and a noise. Before
long the whole slope above them and below
them seemed on the move, and they were
sliding away, huddled all together, in a fearful
confusion of slipping, rattling, cracking slabs
and stones.

It was the trees at the bottom that saved
them. They slid into the edge of a climbing
wood of pines that here stood right up the
mountain slope from the deeper darker forests
of the valleys below. Some caught hold of the
trunks and swung themselves into lower
branches, some (like the little hobbit) got
behind a tree to shelter from the onslaught of
the rocks. Soon the danger was over, the slide
had stopped, and the last faint crashes could
be heard as the largest of the disturbed stones
went bounding and spinning among the
bracken and the pine-roots far below.

“Well! that has got us on a bit,” said
Gandalf; “and even goblins tracking us will have
a job to come down here quietly.”

“I daresay,” grumbled Bombur; “but they
won’t find it difficult to send stones bouncing
down on our heads.” The dwarves (and Bilbo)
were feeling far from happy, and were rubbing
their bruised and damaged legs and feet.

“Nonsense! We are going to turn aside
here out of the path of the slide. We must be
quick! Look at the light!”

The sun had long gone behind the
mountains. Already the shadows were
deepening about them, though far away through
the trees and over the black tops of those
growing lower down they could still see the
evening lights on the plains beyond. They
limped along now as fast as they were able
down the gentle slopes of a pine forest in a
slanting path leading steadily southwards. At
times they were pushing through a sea of
bracken with tall fronds rising right above the
hobbit’s head; at times they were marching
along quiet as quiet over a floor of pine-
needles; and all the while the forest-gloom got
heavier and the forest-silence deeper. There
was no wind that evening to bring even a sea-
sighing into the branches of the trees.

“Must we go any further?” asked Bilbo, when it
was so dark that he could only just see Thorin's
beard wagging beside him, and so quiet that he
could hear the dwarves’ breathing like a loud
noise. “My toes are all bruised and bent, and
my legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like
an empty sack.”

“A bit further,” said Gandalf.

After what seemed ages further they came
suddenly to an opening where no trees grew.
The moon was up and was shining into the
clearing. Somehow it struck all of them as not at

all a nice place, although there was nothing
wrong to see.

All of a sudden they heard a howl away
down hill, a long shuddering howl. It was
answered by another away to the right and a
good deal nearer to them; then by another not
far away to the left. It was wolves howling at the
moon, wolves gathering together!

There were no wolves living near Mr.
Baggins’ hole at home, but he knew that noise.
He had had it described to him often enough in
tales. One of his elder cousins (on the Took
side), who had been a great traveller, used to
imitate it to frighten him. To hear it out in the
forest under the moon was too much for Bilbo.
Even magic rings are not much use against
wolves — especially against the evil packs that
lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested
mountains, over the Edge of the Wild on the
borders of the unknown. Wolves of that sort
smell keener than goblins, and do not need to
see you to catch you!

“What shall we do, what shall we do!” he
cried. “Escaping goblins to be caught by
wolves!” he said, and it became a proverb,
though we now say “out of the frying-pan into the
fire” in the same sort of uncomfortable
situations.

“Up the trees quick!” cried Gandalf; and
they ran to the trees at the edge of the glade,
hunting for those that had branches fairly low, or

were slender enough to swarm up. They found
them as quick as ever they could, you can
guess; and up they went as high as ever they
could trust the branches. You would have
laughed (from a safe distance), if you had seen
the dwarves sitting up in the trees with their
beards dangling down, like old gentlemen gone
cracked and playing at being boys. Fili and Kili
were at the top of a tall larch like an enormous
Christmas tree. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, and Gloin
were more comfortable in a huge pine with
regular branches sticking out at intervals like
the spokes of a wheel. Bifur, Bofur, Bombur,
and Thorin were in another. Dwalin and Balin
had swarmed up a tall slender fir with few
branches and were trying to find a place to sit in
the greenery of the topmost boughs. Gandalf,
who was a good deal taller than the others, had
found a tree into which they could not climb, a
large pine standing at the very edge of the
glade. He was quite hidden in its boughs, but
you could see his eyes gleaming in the moon
as he peeped out.

And Bilbo? He could not get into any tree,
and was scuttling about from trunk to trunk, like
a rabbit that has lost its hole and has a dog
after it.

“You’ve left the burglar behind again!’’ said
Nori to Dori looking down.

“I can’t be always carrying burglars on my
back,” said Dori, “down tunnels and up trees!

What do you think I am? A porter?”

“He’ll be eaten if we don't do something,”
said Thorin, for there were howls all round them
now, getting nearer and nearer. “Dori!” he
called, for Dori was lowest down in the easiest
tree, “be quick, and give Mr. Baggins a hand
up!”

Dori was really a decent fellow in spite of
his grumbling. Poor Bilbo could not reach his
hand even when he climbed down to the bottom
branch and hung his arm down as far as ever
he could. So Dori actually climbed out of the
tree and let Bilbo scramble up and stand on his
back.

Just at that moment the wolves trotted
howling into the clearing. All of a sudden there
were hundreds of eyes looking at them. Still
Dori did not let Bilbo down. He waited till he
had clambered off his shoulders into the
branches, and then he jumped for the branches
himself. Only just in time! A wolf snapped at his
cloak as he swung up, and nearly got him. In a
minute there was a whole pack of them yelping
all round the tree and leaping up at the trunk,
with eyes blazing and tongues hanging out.

But even the wild Wargs (for so the evil
wolves over the Edge of the Wild were named)
cannot climb trees. For a time they were safe.
Luckily it was warm and not windy. Trees are
not very comfortable to sit in for long at any
time; but in the cold and the wind, with wolves

all round below waiting for you, they can be
perfectly miserable places.

This glade in the ring of trees was evidently
a meeting-place of the wolves. More and more
kept coming in. They left guards at the foot of
the tree in which Dori and Bilbo were, and then
went snuffling about till they had smelt out every
tree that had anyone in it. These they guarded
too, while all the rest (hundreds and hundreds it
seemed) went and sat in a great circle in the
glade; and in the middle of the circle was a
great grey wolf. He spoke to them in the
dreadful language of the Wargs. Gandalf
understood it. Bilbo did not, but it sounded
terrible to him, and as if all their talk was about
cruel and wicked things, as it was. Every now
and then all the Wargs in the circle would
answer their grey chief all together, and their
dreadful clamour almost made the hobbit fall
out of his pine-tree.

I will tell you what Gandalf heard, though
Bilbo did not understand it. The Wargs and the
goblins often helped one another in wicked
deeds. Goblins do not usually venture very far
from their mountains, unless they are driven out
and are looking for new homes, or are
marching to war (which I am glad to say has not
happened for a long while). But in those days
they sometimes used to go on raids, especially
to get food or slaves to work for them. Then they
often got the Wargs to help and shared the

plunder with them. Sometimes they rode on
wolves like men do on horses. Now it seemed
that a great goblin-raid had been planned for
that very night. The Wargs had come to meet
the goblins and the goblins were late. The
reason, no doubt, was the death of the Great
Goblin, and all the excitement caused by the
dwarves and Bilbo and the wizard, for whom
they were probably still hunting.

In spite of the dangers of this far land bold
men had of late been making their way back
into it from the South, cutting down trees, and
building themselves places to live in among the
more pleasant woods in the valleys and along
the river-shores. There were many of them, and
they were brave and well-armed, and even the
Wargs dared not attack them if there were
many together, or in the bright day. But now they
had planned with the goblins’ help to come by
night upon some of the villages nearest the
mountains. If their plan had been carried out,
there would have been none left there next day;
all would have been killed except the few the
goblins kept from the wolves and carried back
as prisoners to their caves.

This was dreadful talk to listen to, not only
because of the brave woodmen and their wives
and children, but also because of the danger
which now threatened Gandalf and his friends.
The Wargs were angry and puzzled at finding
them here in their very meeting-place. They

thought they were friends of the woodmen, and
were come to spy on them, and would take
news of their plans down into the valleys, and
then the goblins and the wolves would have to
fight a terrible battle instead of capturing
prisoners and devouring people waked
suddenly from their sleep. So the Wargs had no
intention of going away and letting the people
up the trees escape, at any rate not until
morning. And long before that, they said, goblin
soldiers would be coming down from the
mountains; and goblins can climb trees, or cut
them down.

Now you can understand why Gandalf,
listening to their growling and yelping, began to
be dreadfully afraid, wizard though he was, and
to feel that they were in a very bad place, and
had not yet escaped at all. All the same he was
not going to let them have it all their own way,
though he could not do very much stuck up in a
tall tree with wolves all round on the ground
below. He gathered the huge pine-cones from
the branches of the tree. Then he set one alight
with bright blue fire, and threw it whizzing down
among the circle of the wolves. It struck one on
the back, and immediately his shaggy coat
caught fire, and he was leaping to and fro
yelping horribly. Then another came and
another, one in blue flames, one in red, another
in green. They burst on the ground in the middle
of the circle and went off in coloured sparks and

smoke. A specially large one hit the chief wolf
on the nose, and he leaped in the air ten feet,
and then rushed round and round the circle
biting and snapping even at the other wolves in
his anger and fright.

The dwarves and Bilbo shouted and
cheered. The rage of the wolves was terrible to
see, and the commotion they made filled all the
forest. Wolves are afraid of fire at all times, but
this was a most horrible and uncanny fire. If a
spark got in their coats it stuck and burned into
them, and unless they rolled over quick they
were soon all in flames. Very soon all about the
glade wolves were rolling over and over to put
out the sparks on their backs, while those that
were burning were running about howling and
setting others alight, till their own friends chased
them away and they fled off down the slopes
crying and yammering and looking for water.

"What is all this uproar in the forest tonight?”
said the Lord of the Eagles. He was sitting,
black in the moonlight, on the top of a lonely
pinnacle of rock at the eastern edge of the
mountains. “I hear wolves’ voices! Are the
goblins at mischief in the woods?”

He swept up into the air, and immediately
two of his guards from the rocks at either hand
leaped up to follow him. They circled up in the
sky and looked down upon the ring of the

Wargs, a tiny spot far far below. But eagles
have keen eyes and can see small things at a
great distance. The Lord of the Eagles of the
Misty Mountains had eyes that could look at the
sun unblinking, and could see a rabbit moving
on the ground a mile below even in the
moonlight. So though he could not see the
people in the trees, he could make out the
commotion among the wolves and see the tiny
flashes of fire, and hear the howling and yelping
come up faint from far beneath him. Also he
could see the glint of the moon on goblin spears
and helmets, as long lines of the wicked folk
crept down the hillsides from their gate and
wound into the wood.

Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are
cowardly and cruel. But the ancient race of the
northern mountains were the greatest of all
birds; they were proud and strong and noble-
hearted. They did not love goblins, or fear them.
When they took any notice of them at all (which
was seldom, for they did not eat such
creatures), they swooped on them and drove
them shrieking back to their caves, and
stopped whatever wickedness they were doing.
The goblins hated the eagles and feared them,
but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive
them from the mountains.

Tonight the Lord of the Eagles was filled
with curiosity to know what was afoot; so he
summoned many other eagles to him, and they

flew away from the mountains, and slowly
circling ever round and round they came down,
down, down towards the ring of the wolves and
the meeting-place of the goblins.

A very good thing too! Dreadful things had
been going on down there. The wolves that had
caught fire and fled into the forest had set it
alight in several places, it was high summer,
and on this eastern side of the mountains there
had been little rain for some time. Yellowing
bracken, fallen branches, deep-piled pine-
needles, and here and there dead trees, were
soon in flames. All round the clearing of the
Wargs fire was leaping. But the wolf-guards did
not leave the trees. Maddened and angry they
were leaping and howling round the trunks, and
cursing the dwarves in their horrible language,
with their tongues hanging out, and their eyes
shining as red and fierce as the flames.

Then suddenly goblins came running up
yelling. They thought a battle with the woodmen
was going on; but they soon learned what had
really happened. Some of them actually sat
down and laughed. Others waved their spears
and clashed the shafts against their shields.
Goblins are not afraid of fire, and they soon had
a plan which seemed to them most amusing.

Some got all the wolves together in a pack.
Some stacked fern and brushwood round the
tree-trunks. Others rushed round and stamped
and beat, and beat and stamped, until nearly all

the flames were put out — but they did not put
out the fire nearest to the trees where the
dwarves were. That fire they fed with leaves and
dead branches and bracken. Soon they had a
ring of smoke and flame all round the dwarves,
a ring which they kept from spreading outwards;
but it closed slowly in, till the running fire was
licking the fuel piled under the trees. Smoke
was in Bilbo’s eyes, he could feel the heat of
the flames; and through the reek he could see
the goblins dancing round and round in a circle
like people round a midsummer bonfire.
Outside the ring of dancing warriors with spears
and axes stood the wolves at a respectful
distance, watching and waiting.

He could hear the goblins beginning a
horrible song:

Fifteen birds in five fir-trees,

their feathers were fanned in a fiery

breeze!

But, funny little birds, they had no wings!

O what shall we do with the funny little
things?

Roast ’em alive, orstewthem in a pot;
fry them, boil them and eat them hot?

Then they stopped and shouted out: “Fly
away little birds! Fly away if you can! Come
down little birds, or you will get roasted in your

nests! Sing, sing little birds! Why don’t you
sing?”

“Go away! little boys!” shouted Gandalf in
answer. “It isn’t bird-nesting time. Also naughty
little boys that play with fire get punished.” He
said it to make them angry, and to show them
he was not frightened of them — though of
course he was, wizard though he was. But they
took no notice, and they went on singing.

Bum, bum tree and fern!

Shrivel and scorch! A fizzling torch
To light the night for our delight,

Ya hey!

Bake and toast ’em, fry and roast ’em!
till beards blaze, and eyes glaze;
till hair smells and skins crack,
fat melts, and bones black
in cinders lie
beneath the sky!

So dwarves shall die,
and light the night for our delight,

Ya hey!

Ya-harri-hey!

Ya hoy!

And with that Ya hoy\ the flames were
under Gandalf s tree. In a moment it spread to
the others. The bark caught fire, the lower

branches cracked.

Then Gandalf climbed to the top of his tree.
The sudden splendour flashed from his wand
like lightning, as he got ready to spring down
from on high right among the spears of the
goblins. That would have been the end of him,
though he would probably have killed many of
them as he came hurtling down like a
thunderbolt. But he never leaped.

Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagles
swept down from above, seized him in his
talons, and was gone.

There was a howl of anger and surprise from
the goblins. Loud cried the Lord of the Eagles,
to whom Gandalf had now spoken. Back swept
the great birds that were with him, and down
they came like huge black shadows. The
wolves yammered and gnashed their teeth; the
goblins yelled and stamped with rage, and flung
their heavy spears in the air in vain. Over them
swooped the eagles; the dark rush of their
beating wings smote them to the floor or drove
them far away; their talons tore at goblin faces.
Other birds flew to the tree-tops and seized the
dwarves, who were scrambling up now as far
as they ever dared to go.

Poor little Bilbo was very nearly left behind
again! He just managed to catch hold of Dori’s
legs, as Dori was borne off last of all; and up

they went together above the tumult and the
burning, Bilbo swinging in the air with his arms
nearly breaking.

Now far below the goblins and the wolves
were scattering far and wide in the woods. A
few eagles were still circling and sweeping
above the battleground. The flames about the
trees sprang suddenly up above the highest
branches. They went up in crackling fire. There
was a sudden flurry of sparks and smoke. Bilbo
had escaped only just in time!

Soon the light of the burning was faint
below, a red twinkle on the black floor; and they
were high up in the sky, rising all the time in
strong sweeping circles. Bilbo never forgot that
flight, clinging onto Dori’s ankles. He moaned
“my arms, my arms!”; but Dori groaned “my
poor legs, my poor legs!”

At the best of times heights made Bilbo
giddy. He used to turn queer if he looked over
the edge of quite a little cliff; and he had never
liked ladders, let alone trees (never having had
to escape from wolves before). So you can
imagine how his head swam now, when he
looked down between his dangling toes and
saw the dark lands opening wide underneath
him, touched here and there with the light of the
moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in the
plains.

The pale peaks of the mountains were
coming nearer, moonlit spikes of rock sticking

out of black shadows. Summer or not, it
seemed very cold. He shut his eyes and
wondered if he could hold on any longer. Then
he imagined what would happen if he did not.
He felt sick.

The flight ended only just in time for him, just
before his arms gave way. He loosed Dori’s
ankles with a gasp and fell onto the rough
platform of an eagle’s eyrie. There he lay
without speaking, and his thoughts were a
mixture of surprise at being saved from the fire,
and fear lest he fall off that narrow place into the
deep shadows on either side. He was feeling
very queer indeed in his head by this time after
the dreadful adventures of the last three days
with next to nothing to eat, and he found himself
saying aloud: “Now I know what a piece of
bacon feels like when it is suddenly picked out
of the pan on a fork and put back on the shelf!”

“No you don’t!” he heard Dori answering,
“because the bacon knows that it will get back
in the pan sooner or later; and it is to be hoped
we shan’t. Also eagles aren’t forks!”

“O no! Not a bit like storks — forks, I mean,”
said Bilbo sitting up and looking anxiously at
the eagle who was perched close by. He
wondered what other nonsense he had been
saying, and if the eagle would think it rude. You
ought not to be rude to an eagle, when you are
only the size of a hobbit, and are up in his eyrie
at night!

The eagle only sharpened his beak on a
stone and trimmed his feathers and took no
notice.

Soon another eagle flew up. “The Lord of
the Eagles bids you to bring your prisoners to
the Great Shelf,” he cried and was off again.
The other seized Dori in his claws and flew
away with him into the night leaving Bilbo all
alone. He had just strength to wonder what the
messenger had meant by ‘prisoners,’ and to
begin to think of being torn up for supper like a
rabbit, when his own turn came.

The eagle came back, seized him in his
talons by the back of his coat, and swooped off.
This time he flew only a short way. Very soon
Bilbo was laid down, trembling with fear, on a
wide shelf of rock on the mountain-side. There
was no path down on to it save by flying; and no
path down off it except by jumping over a
precipice. There he found all the others sitting
with their backs to the mountain wall. The Lord
of the Eagles also was there and was speaking
to Gandalf.

It seemed that Bilbo was not going to be
eaten after all. The wizard and the eagle-lord
appeared to know one another slightly, and
even to be on friendly terms. As a matter of fact
Gandalf, who had often been in the mountains,
had once rendered a service to the eagles and
healed their lord from an arrow-wound. So you
see ‘prisoners’ had meant ‘prisoners rescued

from the goblins’ only, and not captives of the
eagles. As Bilbo listened to the talk of Gandalf
he realized that at last they were going to
escape really and truly from the dreadful
mountains. He was discussing plans with the
Great Eagle for carrying the dwarves and
himself and Bilbo far away and setting them
down well on their journey across the plains
below.

The Misty Mountains looking West from the
Eyrie towards Goblin Gate

The Lord of the Eagles would not take them
anywhere near where men lived. “They would
shoot at us with their great bows of yew,” he
said, “for they would think we were after their
sheep. And at other times they would be right.
No! we are glad to cheat the goblins of their
sport, and glad to repay our thanks to you, but
we will not risk ourselves for dwarves in the
southward plains.”

“Very well,” said Gandalf. “Take us where
and as far as you will! We are already deeply
obliged to you. But in the meantime we are
famished with hunger.”

“I am nearly dead of it,” said Bilbo in a weak
little voice that nobody heard.

“That can perhaps be mended,” said the
Lord of the Eagles.

Later on you might have seen a bright fire
on the shelf of rock and the figures of the
dwarves round it cooking and making a fine
roasting smell. The eagles had brought up dry
boughs for fuel, and they had brought rabbits,
hares, and a small sheep. The dwarves
managed all the preparations. Bilbo was too
weak to help, and anyway he was not much
good at skinning rabbits or cutting up meat,
being used to having it delivered by the butcher

all ready to cook. Gandalf, too, was lying down
after doing his part in setting the fire going,
since Oin and Gloin had lost their tinder-boxes.
(Dwarves have never taken to matches even
yet.)

So ended the adventures of the Misty
Mountains. Soon Bilbo’s stomach was feeling
full and comfortable again, and he felt he could
sleep contentedly, though really he would have
liked a loaf and butter better than bits of meat
toasted on sticks. He slept curled up on the
hard rock more soundly than ever he had done
on his feather-bed in his own little hole at home.
But all night he dreamed of his own house and
wandered in his sleep into all his different
rooms looking for something that he could not
find nor remember what it looked like.

Chapter VII

QUEER LODGINGS

The next morning Bilbo woke up with the early
sun in his eyes. He jumped up to look at the
time and to go and put his kettle on — and found
he was not home at all. So he sat down and
wished in vain for a wash and a brush. He did
not get either, nor tea nor toast nor bacon for
his breakfast, only cold mutton and rabbit. And
after that he had to get ready for a fresh start.

This time he was allowed to climb on to an
eagle’s back and cling between his wings. The
air rushed over him and he shut his eyes. The
dwarves were crying farewells and promising to
repay the Lord of the Eagles if ever they could,
as off rose fifteen great birds from the
mountain’s side. The sun was still close to the
eastern edge of things. The morning was cool,
and mists were in the valleys and hollows and
twined here and there about the peaks and
pinnacles of the hills. Bilbo opened an eye to
peep and saw that the birds were already high

up and the world was far away, and the
mountains were falling back behind them into
the distance. He shut his eyes again and held
on tighter.

“Don’t pinch!” said his eagle. “You need not
be frightened like a rabbit, even if you look
rather like one. It is a fair morning with little
wind. What is finer than flying?”

Bilbo would have liked to say: “A warm bath
and late breakfast on the lawn afterwards;” but
he thought it better to say nothing at all, and to
let go his clutch just a tiny bit.

After a good while the eagles must have
seen the point they were making for, even from
their great height, for they began to go down
circling round in great spirals. They did this for a
long while, and at last the hobbit opened his
eyes again. The earth was much nearer, and
below them were trees that looked like oaks
and elms, and wide grass lands, and a river
running through it all. But cropping out of the
ground, right in the path of the stream which
looped itself about it, was a great rock, almost
a hill of stone, like a last outpost of the distant
mountains, or a huge piece cast miles into the
plain by some giant among giants.

Quickly now to the top of this rock the
eagles swooped one by one and set down their
passengers.

“Farewell!” they cried, “wherever you fare,

till your eyries receive you at the journey’s end!”
That is the polite thing to say among eagles.

“May the wind under your wings bear you
where the sun sails and the moon walks,”
answered Gandalf, who knew the correct reply.

And so they parted. And though the Lord of
the Eagles became in after days the King of All
Birds and wore a golden crown, and his fifteen
chieftains golden collars (made of the gold that
the dwarves gave them), Bilbo never saw them
again — except high and far off in the battle of
Five Armies. But as that comes in at the end of
this tale we will say no more about it just now.

There was a flat space on the top of the hill
of stone and a well worn path with many steps
leading down it to the river, across which a ford
of huge flat stones led to the grass-land beyond
the stream. There was a little cave (a
wholesome one with a pebbly floor) at the foot
of the steps and near the end of the stony ford.
Here the party gathered and discussed what
was to be done.

“I always meant to see you all safe (if
possible) over the mountains,” said the wizard,
“and now by good management and good luck I
have done it. Indeed we are now a good deal
further east than I ever meant to come with you,
for after all this is not my adventure. I may look
in on it again before it is all over, but in the
meanwhile I have some other pressing

business to attend to.”

The dwarves groaned and looked most
distressed, and Bilbo wept. They had begun to
think Gandalf was going to come all the way
and would always be there to help them out of
difficulties. “I am not going to disappear this
very instant,” said he. “I can give you a day or
two more. Probably I can help you out of your
present plight, and I need a little help myself.
We have no food, and no baggage, and no
ponies to ride; and you don’t know where you
are. Now I can tell you that. You are still some
miles north of the path which we should have
been following, if we had not left the mountain
pass in a hurry. Very few people live in these
parts, unless they have come here since I was
last down this way, which is some years ago.
But there is somebody that I know of, who lives
not far away. That Somebody made the steps
on the great rock — the Carrock I believe he
calls it. He does not come here often, certainly
not in the daytime, and it is no good waiting for
him. In fact it would be very dangerous. We
must go and find him; and if all goes well at our
meeting, I think I shall be off and wish you like
the eagles ‘farewell wherever you fare! ' ”

They begged him not to leave them. They
offered him dragon-gold and silver and jewels,
but he would not change his mind. “We shall
see, we shall see!” he said, “and I think I have

earned already some of your dragon-gold —
when you have got it.”

After that they stopped pleading. Then they took
off their clothes and bathed in the river, which
was shallow and clear and stony at the ford.
When they had dried in the sun, which was now
strong and warm, they were refreshed, if still
sore and a little hungry. Soon they crossed the
ford (carrying the hobbit), and then began to
march through the long green grass and down
the lines of the wide-armed oaks and the tall
elms.

“And why is it called the Carrock?” asked
Bilbo as he went along at the wizard’s side.

“He called it the Carrock, because carrock
is his word for it. He calls things like that
carrocks, and this one is the Carrock because
it is the only one near his home and he knows it
well.”

“Who calls it? Who knows it?”

“The Somebody I spoke of — a very great
person. You must all be very polite when I
introduce you. I shall introduce you slowly, two
by two, I think; and you must be careful not to
annoy him, or heaven knows what will happen.
He can be appalling when he is angry, though
he is kind enough if humoured. Still I warn you

he gets angry easily.”

The dwarves all gathered round when they
heard the wizard talking like this to Bilbo. “Is
that the person you are taking us to now?” they
asked. “Couldn’t you find someone more easy-
tempered? Hadn't you better explain it all a bit
clearer?” — and so on.

“Yes it certainly is! No I could not! And I was
explaining very carefully” answered the wizard
crossly. “If you must know more, his name is
Beorn. He is very strong, and he is a skin-
changer.”

“What! a furrier, a man that calls rabbits
conies, when he doesn’t turn their skins into
squirrels?” asked Bilbo.

“Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!”
said Gandalf. “Don’t be a fool Mr. Baggins if
you can help it; and in the name of all wonder
don’t mention the word furrier again as long as
you are within a hundred miles of his house, nor
rug, cape, tippet, muff, nor any other such
unfortunate word! He is a skin-changer. He
changes his skin: sometimes he is a huge
black bear, sometimes he is a great strong
black-haired man with huge arms and a great
beard. I cannot tell you much more, though that
ought to be enough. Some say that he is a bear
descended from the great and ancient bears of
the mountains that lived there before the giants
came. Others say that he is a man descended

from the first men who lived before Smaug or
the other dragons came into this part of the
world, and before the goblins came into the hills
out of the North. I cannot say, though I fancy the
last is the true tale. He is not the sort of person
to ask questions of.

“At any rate he is under no enchantment but
his own. He lives in an oak-wood and has a
great wooden house; and as a man he keeps
cattle and horses which are nearly as
marvellous as himself. They work for him and
talk to him. He does not eat them; neither does
he hunt or eat wild animals. He keeps hives and
hives of great fierce bees, and lives most on
cream and honey. As a bear he ranges far and
wide. I once saw him sitting all alone on the top
of the Carrock at night watching the moon
sinking towards the Misty Mountains, and I
heard him growl in the tongue of bears: The
day will come when they will perish and I shall
go back!’ That is why I believe he once came
from the mountains himself.”

Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think
about, and they asked no more questions. They
still had a long way to walk before them. Up
slope and down dale they plodded. It grew very
hot. Sometimes they rested under the trees,
and then Bilbo felt so hungry that he would have

eaten acorns, if any had been ripe enough yet
to have fallen to the ground.

It was the middle of the afternoon before
they noticed that great patches of flowers had
begun to spring up, all the same kinds growing
together as if they had been planted. Especially
there was clover, waving patches of cockscomb
clover, and purple clover, and wide stretches of
short white sweet honey-smelling clover. There
was a buzzing and a whirring and a droning in
the air. Bees were busy everywhere. And such
bees! Bilbo had never seen anything like them.

“If one was to sting me,” he thought, “I
should swell up as big again as I am!”

They were bigger than hornets. The drones
were bigger than your thumb, a good deal, and
the bands of yellow on their deep black bodies
shone like fiery gold.

“We are getting near,” said Gandalf. “We
are on the edge of his bee-pastures.”

After a while they came to a belt of tall and very
ancient oaks, and beyond these to a high thorn-
hedge through which you could neither see nor
scramble.

“You had better wait here,” said the wizard
to the dwarves; “and when I call or whistle begin
to come after me — you will see the way I go —

but only in pairs, mind, about five minutes
between each pair of you. Bombur is fattest and
will do for two, he had better come alone and
last. Come on Mr. Baggins! There is a gate
somewhere round this way.” And with that he
went off along the hedge taking the frightened
hobbit with him.

They soon came to a wooden gate, high
and broad, beyond which they could see
gardens and a cluster of low wooden buildings,
some thatched and made of unshaped logs:
barns, stables, sheds, and a long low wooden
house. Inside on the southward side of the great
hedge were rows and rows of hives with bell-
shaped tops made of straw. The noise of the
giant bees flying to and fro and crawling in and
out filled all the air.

The wizard and the hobbit pushed open the
heavy creaking gate and went down a wide
track towards the house. Some horses, very
sleek and well-groomed, trotted up across the
grass and looked at them intently with very
intelligent faces; then off they galloped to the
buildings.

“They have gone to tell him of the arrival of
strangers,” said Gandalf.

Soon they reached a courtyard, three walls
of which were formed by the wooden house and
its two long wings. In the middle there was lying
a great oak-trunk with many lopped branches

beside it. Standing near was a huge man with a
thick black beard and hair, and great bare arms
and legs with knotted muscles. He was clothed
in a tunic of wool down to his knees, and was
leaning on a large axe. The horses were
standing by him with their noses at his shoulder.

“Ugh! here they are!” he said to the horses.
“They don’t look dangerous. You can be off!” He
laughed a great rolling laugh, put down his axe
and came forward.

“Who are you and what do you want?” he
asked gruffly, standing in front of them and
towering tall above Gandalf. As for Bilbo he
could easily have trotted through his legs
without ducking his head to miss the fringe of
the man’s brown tunic.

“I am Gandalf,” said the wizard.

“Never heard of him,” growled the man.
“And what’s this little fellow?” he said, stooping
down to frown at the hobbit with his bushy black
eyebrows.

“That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good
family and unimpeachable reputation,” said
Gandalf. Bilbo bowed. He had no hat to take
off, and was painfully conscious of his many
missing buttons. “I am a wizard,” continued
Gandalf. “I have heard of you, if you have not
heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my
good cousin Radagast who lives near the
Southern borders of Mirkwood?”

“Yes; not a bad fellow as wizards go, I
believe. I used to see him now and again,” said
Beorn. “Well, now I know who you are, or who
you say you are. What do you want?”

“To tell you the truth, we have lost our
luggage and nearly lost our way, and are rather
in need of help, or at least of advice. I may say
we have had rather a bad time with goblins in
the mountains.”

“Goblins?” said the big man less gruffly. “O
ho, so you’ve been having trouble with them
have you? What did you go near them for?”

“We did not mean to. They surprised us at
night in a pass which we had to cross; we were
coming out of the Lands over West into these
countries — it is a long tale.”

“Then you had better come inside and tell
me some of it, if it won’t take all day,” said the
man leading the way through a dark door that
opened out of the courtyard into the house.

Following him they found themselves in a
wide hall with a fire-place in the middle. Though
it was summer there was a wood-fire burning
and the smoke was rising to the blackened
rafters in search of the way out through an
opening in the roof. They passed through this
dim hall, lit only by the fire and the hole above it,
and came through another smaller door into a
sort of veranda propped on wooden posts
made of single tree-trunks. It faced south and

was still warm and filled with the light of the
westering sun which slanted into it, and fell
golden on the garden full of flowers that came
right up to the steps.

foRo'smi

Here they sat on wooden benches while
Gandalf began his tale, and Bilbo swung his
dangling legs and looked at the flowers in the
garden, wondering what their names could be,
as he had never seen half of them before.

“I was coming over the mountains with a
friend or two. . .” said the wizard.

“Or two? I can only see one, and a little one
at that,” said Beorn.

“Well to tell you the truth, I did not like to
bother you with a lot of us, until I found out if you
were busy. I will give a call, if I may.”

“Go on, call away!”

So Gandalf gave a long shrill whistle, and
presently Thorin and Dori came round the
house by the garden path and stood bowing low
before them.

“One or three you meant, I see!” said Beorn.
“But these aren’t hobbits, they are dwarves!”

“Thorin Oakenshield, at your service! Dori
at your service!” said the two dwarves bowing
again.

“I don’t need your service, thank you,” said

Beorn, “but I expect you need mine. I am not
over fond of dwarves; but if it is true you are
Thorin (son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe),
and that your companion is respectable, and
that you are enemies of goblins and are not up
to any mischief in my lands — what are you up
to, by the way?”

“They are on their way to visit the land of
their fathers, away east beyond Mirkwood,” put
in Gandalf, “and it is entirely an accident that we
are in your lands at all. We were crossing by the
High Pass that should have brought us to the
road that lies to the south of your country, when
we were attacked by the evil goblins — as I was
about to tell you.”

“Go on telling, then!” said Beorn, who was
never very polite.

“There was a terrible storm; the stone-
giants were out hurling rocks, and at the head of
the pass we took refuge in a cave, the hobbit
and I and several of our companions. . .”

“Do you call two several?”

“Well, no. As a matter of fact there were
more than two.”

“Where are they? Killed, eaten, gone
home?”

“Well, no. They don’t seem all to have come
when I whistled. Shy, I expect. You see, we are
very much afraid that we are rather a lot for you
to entertain.”

“Go on, whistle again! lam in for a party, it
seems, and one or two more won’t make much
difference,” growled Beorn.

Gandalf whistled again; but Nori and Ori
were there almost before he had stopped, for, if
you remember, Gandalf had told them to come
in pairs every five minutes.

“Hullo!” said Beorn. “You came pretty quick
— where were you hiding? Come on my jack-in-
the-boxes!”

“Nori at your service, Ori at. . .” they began;
but Beorn interrupted them.

“Thank you! When I want your help I will ask
for it. Sit down, and let’s get on with this tale, or
it will be supper-time before it is ended.”

“As soon as we were asleep,” went on
Gandalf, “a crack at the back of the cave
opened; goblins came out and grabbed the
hobbit and the dwarves and our troop of ponies

“Troop of ponies? What were you — a
travelling circus? Or were you carrying lots of
goods? Or do you always call six a troop?”

“O no! As a matter of fact there were more
than six ponies, for there were more than six of
us — and well, here are two more!” Just at that
moment Balin and Dwalin appeared and
bowed so low that their beards swept the stone
floor. The big man was frowning at first, but they
did their best to be frightfully polite, and kept on

nodding and bending and bowing and waving
their hoods before their knees (in proper dwarf-
fashion), till he stopped frowning and burst into
a chuckling laugh: they looked so comical.

“Troop, was right,” he said. “A fine comic
one. Come in my merry men, and what are your
names? I don’t want your service just now, only
your names; and then sit down and stop
wagging!”

“Balin and Dwalin,” they said not daring to
be offended, and sat flop on the floor looking
rather surprised.

“Now go on again!” said Beorn to the
wizard.

“Where was I? O yes — I was not grabbed. I
killed a goblin or two with a flash — ”

“Good!” growled Beorn. “It is some good
being a wizard, then.”

“ — and slipped inside the crack before it
closed. I followed down into the main hall, which
was crowded with goblins. The Great Goblin
was there with thirty or forty armed guards. I
thought to myself ‘even if they were not all
chained together, what can a dozen do against
so many?’”

“A dozen! That’s the first time I've heard
eight called a dozen. Or have you still got some
more jacks that haven’t yet come out of their
boxes?”

“Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more

here now — Fili and Kili, I believe,” said Gandalf,
as these two now appeared and stood smiling
and bowing.

“That’s enough!” said Beorn. “Sit down and
be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!”

So Gandalf went on with the tale, until he
came to the fight in the dark, the discovery of
the lower gate, and their horror when they found
that Mr. Baggins had been mislaid. “We
counted ourselves and found that there was no
hobbit. There were only fourteen of us left!”

“Fourteen! That’s the first time I’ve heard
one from ten leave fourteen. You mean nine, or
else you haven’t told me yet all the names of
your party.”

“Well, of course you haven’t seen Oin and
Gloin yet. And, bless me! here they are. I hope
you will forgive them for bothering you.”

“O let ’em all come! Hurry up! Come along,
you two, and sit down! But look here, Gandalf,
even now we have only got yourself and ten
dwarves and the hobbit that was lost. That only
makes eleven (plus one mislaid) and not
fourteen, unless wizards count differently to
other people. But now please get on with the
tale.” Beorn did not show it more than he could
help, but really he had begun to get very
interested. You see, in the old days he had
known the very part of the mountains that
Gandalf was describing. He nodded and he

growled, when he heard of the hobbit’s
reappearance and of their scramble down the
stone-slide and of the wolf-ring in the woods.

When Gandalf came to their climbing into
trees with the wolves all underneath, he got up
and strode about and muttered: “I wish I had
been there! I would have given them more than
fireworks!”

“Well,” said Gandalf very glad to see that
his tale was making a good impression, “I did
the best I could. There we were with the wolves
going mad underneath us and the forest
beginning to blaze in places, when the goblins
came down from the hills and discovered us.
They yelled with delight and sang songs making
fun of us. Fifteen birds in live fir-trees . .

“Good heavens!” growled Beorn. “Don’t
pretend that goblins can’t count. They can.
Twelve isn't fifteen and they know it.”

“And so do I. There were Bifur and Bofur as
well. I haven’t ventured to introduce them
before, but here they are.”

In came Bifur and Bofur. “And me!” gasped
Bombur puffing up behind. He was fat, and also
angry at being left till last. He refused to wait
five minutes, and followed immediately after the
other two.

“Well, now there are fifteen of you; and
since goblins can count, I suppose that is all
that there were up the trees. Now perhaps we

can finish this story without any more
interruptions.” Mr. Baggins saw then how clever
Gandalf had been. The interruptions had really
made Beorn more interested in the story, and
the story had kept him from sending the
dwarves off at once like suspicious beggars.
He never invited people into his house, if he
could help it. He had very few friends and they
lived a good way away; and he never invited
more than a couple of these to his house at a
time. Now he had got fifteen strangers sitting in
his porch!

By the time the wizard had finished his tale
and had told of the eagles’ rescue and of how
they had all been brought to the Carrock, the
sun had fallen behind the peaks of the Misty
Mountains and the shadows were long in
Beorn’s garden.

“Avery good tale!” said he. “The best I have
heard for a long while. If all beggars could tell
such a good one, they might find me kinder.
You may be making it all up, of course, but you
deserve a supper for the story all the same.
Let’s have something to eat!”

“Yes please!” they all said together. “Thank
you very much!”

Inside the hall it was now quite dark. Beorn
clapped his hands, and in trotted four beautiful

white ponies and several large long-bodied
grey dogs. Beorn said something to them in a
queer language like animal noises turned into
talk. They went out again and soon came back
carrying torches in their mouths, which they lit at
the fire and stuck in low brackets on the pillars
of the hall about the central hearth. The dogs
could stand on their hind-legs when they
wished, and carry things with their fore-feet.
Quickly they got out boards and trestles from
the side walls and set them up near the fire.

Then baa — baa — baa! was heard, and in
came some snow-white sheep led by a large
coal-black ram. One bore a white cloth
embroidered at the edges with figures of
animals; others bore on their broad backs trays
with bowls and platters and knives and wooden
spoons, which the dogs took and quickly laid on
the trestle-tables. These were very low, low
enough even for Bilbo to sit at comfortably.
Beside them a pony pushed two low-seated
benches with wide rush-bottoms and little short
thick legs for Gandalf and Thorin, while at the
far end he put Beorn’s big black chair of the
same sort (in which he sat with his great legs
stuck far out under the table). These were all the
chairs he had in his hall, and he probably had
them low like the tables for the convenience of
the wonderful animals that waited on him. What
did the rest sit on? They were not forgotten. The

other ponies came in rolling round drum-
shaped sections of logs, smoothed and
polished, and low enough even for Bilbo; so
soon they were all seated at Beorn’s table, and
the hall had not seen such a gathering for many
a year.

There they had a supper, or a dinner, such
as they had not had since they left the Last
Homely House in the West and said good-bye
to Elrond. The light of the torches and the fire
flickered about them, and on the table were two
tall red beeswax candles. All the time they ate,
Beorn in his deep rolling voice told tales of the
wild lands on this side of the mountains, and
especially of the dark and dangerous wood,
that lay outstretched far to North and South a
day’s ride before them, barring their way to the
East, the terrible forest of Mirkwood.

The dwarves listened and shook their
beards, for they knew that they must soon
venture into that forest and that after the
mountains it was the worst of the perils they had
to pass before they came to the dragon’s
stronghold. When dinner was over they began
to tell tales of their own, but Beorn seemed to
be growing drowsy and paid little heed to them.
They spoke most of gold and silver and jewels
and the making of things by smith-craft, and
Beorn did not appear to care for such things:
there were no things of gold or silver in his hall,

and few save the knives were made of metal at
all.

They sat long at the table with their wooden
drinking-bowls filled with mead. The dark night
came on outside. The fires in the middle of the
hall were built with fresh logs and the torches
were put out, and still they sat in the light of the
dancing flames with the pillars of the house
standing tall behind them, and dark at the top
like trees of the forest. Whether it was magic or
not, it seemed to Bilbo that he heard a sound
like wind in the branches stirring in the rafters,
and the hoot of owls. Soon he began to nod
with sleep and the voices seemed to grow far
away, until he woke with a start.

The great door had creaked and slammed.
Beorn was gone. The dwarves were sitting
cross-legged on the floor round the fire, and
presently they began to sing. Some of the
verses were like this, but there were many
more, and their singing went on for a long while:

The wind was on the withered heath,
but in the forest stirred no leaf:
there shadows lay by night and day,
and dark things silent crept beneath.

The wind came down from mountains
cold,

and like a tide it roared and rolled;
the branches groaned, the forest moaned,
and leaves were laid upon the mould.

The wind went on from West to East;
all movement in the forest ceased,
but shrill and harsh across the marsh
its whistling voices were released.

The grasses hissed, their tassels bent,
the reeds were rattling — on it went
o’er shaken pool under heavens cool
where racing clouds were tom and rent.

It passed the lonely Mountain bare
and swept above the dragon’s lair:
there black and dark lay boulders stark
and flying smoke was in the air.

It left the world and took its flight
over the wide seas of the night.

The moon set sail upon the gale,
and stars were fanned to leaping light.

Bilbo began to nod again. Suddenly up
stood Gandalf.

“It is time for us to sleep,’’ he said, “ — for us,
but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest
sound and safe, but I warn you all not to forget
what Beorn said before he left us: you must not
stray outside until the sun is up, on your peril.”

Bilbo found that beds had already been laid
at the side of the hall, on a sort of raised
platform between the pillars and the outer wall.
For him there was a little mattress of straw and
woollen blankets. He snuggled into them very
gladly, summertime though it was. The fire
burned low and he fell asleep. Yet in the night
he woke: the fire had now sunk to a few
embers; the dwarves and Gandalf were all
asleep, to judge by their breathing; a splash of
white on the floor came from the high moon,
which was peering down through the smoke-
hole in the roof.

There was a growling sound outside, and a
noise as of some great animal scuffling at the
door. Bilbo wondered what it was, and whether
it could be Beorn in enchanted shape, and if he

would come in as a bear and kill them. He
dived under the blankets and hid his head, and
fell asleep again at last in spite of his fears.

It was full morning when he awoke. One of the
dwarves had fallen over him in the shadows
where he lay, and had rolled down with a bump
from the platform on to the floor. It was Bofur,
and he was grumbling about it, when Bilbo
opened his eyes.

“Get up lazybones,” he said, “or there will be
no breakfast left for you.”

Up jumped Bilbo. “Breakfast!” he cried.
“Where is breakfast?”

“Mostly inside us,” answered the other
dwarves who were moving about the hall; “but
what is left is out on the veranda. We have been
about looking for Beorn ever since the sun got
up; but there is no sign of him anywhere, though
we found breakfast laid as soon as we went
out.”

“Where is Gandalf?” asked Bilbo, moving
off to find something to eat as quick as he
could.

“O! out and about somewhere,” they told
him. But he saw no sign of the wizard all that
day until the evening. Just before sunset he
walked into the hall, where the hobbit and the
dwarves were having supper, waited on by

Beorn’s wonderful animals, as they had been all
day. Of Beorn they had seen and heard nothing
since the night before, and they were getting
puzzled.

“Where is our host, and where have you
been all day yourself?” they all cried.

“One question at a time — and none till after
supper! I haven’t had a bite since breakfast.”

At last Gandalf pushed away his plate and
jug — he had eaten two whole loaves (with
masses of butter and honey and clotted cream)
and drunk at least a quart of mead — and he
took out his pipe. “I will answer the second
question first,” he said, “ — but bless me! this is
a splendid place for smoke rings!” Indeed for a
long time they could get nothing more out of
him, he was so busy sending smoke rings
dodging round the pillars of the hall, changing
them into all sorts of different shapes and
colours, and setting them at last chasing one
another out of the hole in the roof. They must
have looked very queer from outside, popping
out into the air one after another, green, blue,
red, silver-grey, yellow, white; big ones, little
ones; little ones dodging through big ones and
joining into figure-eights, and going off like a
flock of birds into the distance.

“I have been picking out bear-tracks,” he
said at last. “There must have been a regular
bears’ meeting outside here last night. I soon

saw that Beorn could not have made them all:
there were far too many of them, and they were
of various sizes too. I should say there were
little bears, large bears, ordinary bears, and
gigantic big bears, all dancing outside from
dark to nearly dawn. They came from almost
every direction, except from the west over the
river, from the Mountains. In that direction only
one set of footprints led — none coming, only
ones going away from here. I followed these as
far as the Carrock. There they disappeared into
the river, but the water was too deep and strong
beyond the rock for me to cross. It is easy
enough, as you remember, to get from this bank
to the Carrock by the ford, but on the other side
is a cliff standing up from a swirling channel. I
had to walk miles before I found a place where
the river was wide and shallow enough for me
to wade and swim, and then miles back again
to pick up the tracks again. By that time it was
too late for me to follow them far. They went
straight off in the direction of the pine-woods on
the east side of the Misty Mountains, where we
had our pleasant little party with the Wargs the
night before last. And now I think I have
answered your first question, too,” ended
Gandalf, and he sat a long while silent.

Bilbo thought he knew what the wizard
meant. “What shall we do,” he cried, “if he leads
all the Wargs and the goblins down here? We

shall all be caught and killed! I thought you said
he was not a friend of theirs.”

“So I did. And don’t be silly! You had better
go to bed, your wits are sleepy.”

The hobbit felt quite crushed, and as there
seemed nothing else to do he did go to bed;
and while the dwarves were still singing songs
he dropped asleep, still puzzling his little head
about Beorn, till he dreamed a dream of
hundreds of black bears dancing slow heavy
dances round and round in the moonlight in the
courtyard. Then he woke up when everyone
else was asleep, and he heard the same
scraping, scuffling, snuffling, and growling as
before.

Next morning they were all wakened by
Beorn himself. “So here you all are still!” he
said. He picked up the hobbit and laughed: “Not
eaten up by Wargs or goblins or wicked bears
yet I see”; and he poked Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat
most disrespectfully. “Little bunny is getting nice
and fat again on bread and honey,” he
chuckled. “Come and have some more!”

So they all went to breakfast with him.
Beorn was most jolly for a change; indeed he
seemed to be in a splendidly good humour and
set them all laughing with his funny stories; nor
did they have to wonder long where he had
been or why he was so nice to them, for he told
them himself. He had been over the river and

right back up into the mountains — from which
you can guess that he could travel quickly, in
bear’s shape at any rate. From the burnt wolf-
glade he had soon found out that part of their
story was true; but he had found more than that:
he had caught a Warg and a goblin wandering
in the woods. From these he had got news: the
goblin patrols were still hunting with Wargs for
the dwarves, and they were fiercely angry
because of the death of the Great Goblin, and
also because of the burning of the chief wolfs
nose and the death from the wizard’s fire of
many of his chief servants. So much they told
him when he forced them, but he guessed there
was more wickedness than this afoot, and that
a great raid of the whole goblin army with their
wolf-allies into the lands shadowed by the
mountains might soon be made to find the
dwarves, or to take vengeance on the men and
creatures that lived there, and who they thought
must be sheltering them.

“It was a good story, that of yours,” said
Beorn, “but I like it still better now I am sure it is
true. You must forgive my not taking your word.
If you lived near the edge of Mirkwood, you
would take the word of no one that you did not
know as well as your brother or better. As it is, I
can only say that I have hurried home as fast as
I could to see that you were safe, and to offer
you any help that I can. I shall think more kindly

of dwarves after this. Killed the Great Goblin,
killed the Great Goblin!” he chuckled fiercely to
himself.

“What did you do with the goblin and the
Warg?” asked Bilbo suddenly.

“Come and see!” said Beorn, and they
followed round the house. A goblin’s head was
stuck outside the gate and a warg-skin was
nailed to a tree just beyond. Beorn was a fierce
enemy. But now he was their friend, and
Gandalf thought it wise to tell him their whole
story and the reason of their journey, so that
they could get the most help he could offer.

This is what he promised to do for them. He
would provide ponies for each of them, and a
horse for Gandalf, for their journey to the forest,
and he would lade them with food to last them
for weeks with care, and packed so as to be as
easy as possible to carry — nuts, flour, sealed
jars of dried fruits, and red earthenware pots of
honey, and twice-baked cakes that would keep
good a long time, and on a little of which they
could march far. The making of these was one
of his secrets; but honey was in them, as in
most of his foods, and they were good to eat,
though they made one thirsty. Water, he said,
they would not need to carry this side of the
forest, for there were streams and springs
along the road. “But your way through Mirkwood
is dark, dangerous and difficult,” he said.

“Water is not easy to find there, nor food. The
time is not yet come for nuts (though it may be
past and gone indeed before you get to the
other side), and nuts are about all that grows
there fit for food; in there the wild things are
dark, queer, and savage. I will provide you with
skins for carrying water, and I will give you
some bows and arrows. But I doubt very much
whether anything you find in Mirkwood will be
wholesome to eat or to drink. There is one
stream there, I know, black and strong which
crosses the path. That you should neither drink
of, nor bathe in; for I have heard that it carries
enchantment and a great drowsiness and
forgetfulness. And in the dim shadows of that
place I don’t think you will shoot anything,
wholesome or unwholesome, without straying
from the path. That you MUST NOT do, for any
reason.

“That is all the advice I can give you.
Beyond the edge of the forest I cannot help you
much; you must depend on your luck and your
courage and the food I send with you. At the
gate of the forest I must ask you to send back
my horse and my ponies. But I wish you all
speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you
come back this way again.’’

They thanked him, of course, with many bows

and sweepings of their hoods and with many an
“at your service, O master of the wide wooden
halls!” But their spirits sank at his grave words,
and they all felt that the adventure was far more
dangerous than they had thought, while all the
time, even if they passed all the perils of the
road, the dragon was waiting at the end.

All that morning they were busy with
preparations. Soon after midday they ate with
Beorn for the last time, and after the meal they
mounted the steeds he was lending them, and
bidding him many farewells they rode off
through his gate at a good pace.

As soon as they left his high hedges at the
east of his fenced lands they turned north and
then bore to the north-west. By his advice they
were no longer making for the main forest-road
to the south of his land. Had they followed the
pass, their path would have led them down a
stream from the mountains that joined the great
river miles south of the Carrock. At that point
there was a deep ford which they might have
passed, if they had still had their ponies, and
beyond that a track led to the skirts of the wood
and to the entrance of the old forest road. But
Beorn had warned them that that way was now
often used by the goblins, while the forest-road
itself, he had heard, was overgrown and
disused at the eastern end and led to
impassable marshes where the paths had long

been lost. Its eastern opening had also always
been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain,
and would have left them still with a long and
difficult northward march when they got to the
other side. North of the Carrock the edge of
Mirkwood drew closer to the borders of the
Great River, and though here the Mountains too
drew down nearer, Beorn advised them to take
this way; for at a place a few days’ ride due
north of the Carrock was the gate of a little-
known pathway through Mirkwood that led
almost straight towards the Lonely Mountain.

“The goblins,” Beorn had said, “will not dare
to cross the Great River for a hundred miles
north of the Carrock nor to come near my house
— it is well protected at night! — but I should ride
fast; for if they make their raid soon they will
cross the river to the south and scour all the
edge of the forest so as to cut you off, and
Wargs run swifter than ponies. Still you are
safer going north, even though you seem to be
going back nearer to their strongholds; for that
is what they will least expect, and they will have
the longer ride to catch you. Be off now as quick
as you may!”

That is why they were now riding in silence,
galloping wherever the ground was grassy and
smooth, with the mountains dark on their left,
and in the distance the line of the river with its
trees drawing ever closer. The sun had only just

turned west when they started, and till evening it
lay golden on the land about them. It was
difficult to think of pursuing goblins behind, and
when they had put many miles between them
and Beorn’s house they began to talk and to
sing again and to forget the dark forest-path
that lay in front. But in the evening when the
dusk came on and the peaks of the mountains
glowered against the sunset they made a camp
and set a guard, and most of them slept
uneasily with dreams in which there came the
howl of hunting wolves and the cries of goblins.

Still the next morning dawned bright and fair
again. There was an autumn-like mist white
upon the ground and the air was chill, but soon
the sun rose red in the East and the mists
vanished, and while the shadows were still long
they were off again. So they rode now for two
more days, and all the while they saw nothing
save grass and flowers and birds and scattered
trees, and occasionally small herds of red deer
browsing or sitting at noon in the shade.
Sometimes Bilbo saw the horns of the harts
sticking up out of the long grass, and at first he
thought they were the dead branches of trees.
That third evening they were so eager to press
on, for Beorn had said that they should reach
the forest-gate early on the fourth-day, that they
rode still forward after dusk and into the night
beneath the moon. As the light faded Bilbo

thought he saw away to the right, or to the left,
the shadowy form of a great bear prowling
along in the same direction. But if he dared to
mention it to Gandalf, the wizard only said:
“Hush! Take no notice!”

Next day they started before dawn, though
their night had been short. As soon as it was
light they could see the forest coming as it were
to meet them, or waiting for them like a black
and frowning wall before them. The land began
to slope up and up, and it seemed to the hobbit
that a silence began to draw in upon them.
Birds began to sing less. There were no more
deer; not even rabbits were to be seen. By the
afternoon they had reached the eaves of
Mirkwood, and were resting almost beneath the
great overhanging boughs of its outer trees.
Their trunks were huge and gnarled, their
branches twisted, their leaves were dark and
long. Ivy grew on them and trailed along the
ground.

“Well, here is Mirkwood!” said Gandalf.
“The greatest of the forests of the Northern
world. I hope you like the look of it. Now you
must send back these excellent ponies you
have borrowed.”

The dwarves were inclined to grumble at
this, but the wizard told them they were fools.
“Beorn is not as far off as you seem to think,
and you had better keep your promises anyway,

for he is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins’ eyes are
sharper than yours, if you have not seen each
night after dark a great bear going along with us
or sitting far off in the moon watching our
camps. Not only to guard you and guide you,
but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn
may be your friend, but he loves his animals as
his children. You do not guess what kindness he
has shown you in letting dwarves ride them so
far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if
you tried to take them into the forest.”

“What about the horse, then?” said Thorin.
“You don’t mention sending that back.”

“I don’t, because I am not sending it.”

“What about your promise then?”

“I will look after that. I am not sending the
horse back, I am riding it!”

Then they knew that Gandalf was going to
leave them at the very edge of Mirkwood, and
they were in despair. But nothing they could say
would change his mind.

“Now we had this all out before, when we
landed on the Carrock,” he said. “It is no use
arguing. I have, as I told you, some pressing
business away south; and I am already late
through bothering with you people. We may
meet again before all is over, and then again of
course we may not. That depends on your luck
and on your courage and sense; and I am
sending Mr. Baggins with you. I have told you

before that he has more about him than you
guess, and you will find that out before long. So
cheer up Bilbo and don’t look so glum. Cheer
up Thorin and Company! This is your expedition
after all. Think of the treasure at the end, and
forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate until
tomorrow morning!”

When tomorrow morning came he still said
the same. So now there was nothing left to do
but to fill their water-skins at a clear spring they
found close to the forest-gate, and unpack the
ponies. They distributed the packages as fairly
as they could, though Bilbo thought his lot was
wearisomely heavy, and did not at all like the
idea of trudging for miles and miles with all that
on his back.

“Don’t you worry!” said Thorin. “It will get
lighter all too soon. Before long I expect we
shall all wish our packs heavier, when the food
begins to run short.”

Then at last they said good-bye to their
ponies and turned their heads for home. Off
they trotted gaily, seeming very glad to put their
tails towards the shadow of Mirkwood. As they
went away Bilbo could have sworn that a thing
like a bear left the shadow of the trees and
shambled off quickly after them.

Now Gandalf too said farewell. Bilbo sat on
the ground feeling very unhappy and wishing he
was beside the wizard on his tall horse. He had

gone just inside the forest after breakfast (a
very poor one), and it had seemed as dark in
there in the morning as at night, and very secret:
“a sort of watching and waiting feeling,” he said
to himself.

“Good-bye!” said Gandalf to Thorin. “And
goodbye to you all, good-bye! Straight through
the forest is your way now. Don’t stray off the
track! — if you do, it is a thousand to one you will
never find it again and never get out of
Mirkwood; and then I don’t suppose I, or any
one else, will ever see you again.”

“Do we really have to go through?” groaned
the hobbit.

“Yes, you do!” said the wizard, “if you want
to get to the other side. You must either go
through or give up your quest. And I am not
going to allow you to back out now, Mr.
Baggins. I am ashamed of you for thinking of it.
You have got to look after all these dwarves for
me,” he laughed.

“No! no!” said Bilbo. “I didn’t mean that. I
meant, is there no way round?”

“There is, if you care to go two hundred
miles or so out of your way north, and twice that
south. But you wouldn’t get a safe path even
then. There are no safe paths in this part of the
world. Remember you are over the Edge of the
Wild now, and in for all sorts of fun wherever you
go. Before you could get round Mirkwood in the

North you would be right among the slopes of
the Grey Mountains, and they are simply stiff
with goblins, hobgoblins, and ores of the worst
description. Before you could get round it in the
South, you would get into the land of the
Necromancer; and even you, Bilbo, won’t need
me to tell you tales of that black sorcerer. I don’t
advise you to go anywhere near the places
overlooked by his dark tower! Stick to the
forest-track, keep your spirits up, hope for the
best, and with a tremendous slice of luck you
may come out one day and see the Long
Marshes lying below you, and beyond them,
high in the East, the Lonely Mountain where
dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not
expecting you.”

“Very comforting you are to be sure,”
growled Thorin. “Good-bye! If you won’t come
with us, you had better get off without any more
talk!”

“Good-bye then, and really good-bye!” said
Gandalf, and he turned his horse and rode
down into the West. But he could not resist the
temptation to have the last word. Before he had
passed quite out of hearing he turned and put
his hands to his mouth and called to them. They
heard his voice come faintly: “Good-bye! Be
good, take care of yourselves — and DON’T
LEAVE THE PATH!”

Then he galloped away and was soon lost

to sight. “O good-bye and go away!” grunted the
dwarves, all the more angry because they were
really filled with dismay at losing him. Now
began the most dangerous part of all the
journey. They each shouldered the heavy pack
and the water-skin which was their share, and
turned from the light that lay on the lands
outside and plunged into the forest.

Chapter VIII

FLIES AND SPIDERS

They walked in single file. The entrance to the
path was like a sort of arch leading into a
gloomy tunnel made by two great trees that
leant together, too old and strangled with ivy
and hung with lichen to bear more than a few
blackened leaves. The path itself was narrow
and wound in and out among the trunks. Soon
the light at the gate was like a little bright hole
far behind, and the quiet was so deep that their
feet seemed to thump along while all the trees
leaned over them and listened.

As their eyes became used to the dimness
they could see a little way to either side in a sort
of darkened green glimmer. Occasionally a
slender beam of sun that had the luck to slip in
through some opening in the leaves far above,
and still more luck in not being caught in the
tangled boughs and matted twigs beneath,
stabbed down thin and bright before them. But

this was seldom, and it soon ceased altogether.

There were black squirrels in the wood. As
Bilbo’s sharp inquisitive eyes got used to
seeing things he could catch glimpses of them
whisking off the path and scuttling behind tree-
trunks. There were queer noises too, grunts,
scufflings, and hurryings in the undergrowth, and
among the leaves that lay piled endlessly thick
in places on the forest-floor; but what made the
noises he could not see. The nastiest things
they saw were the cobwebs: dark dense
cobwebs with threads extraordinarily thick,
often stretched from tree to tree, or tangled in
the lower branches on either side of them.
There were none stretched across the path, but
whether because some magic kept it clear, or
for what other reason they could not guess.

It was not long before they grew to hate the
forest as heartily as they had hated the tunnels
of the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less
hope of any ending. But they had to go on and
on, long after they were sick for a sight of the
sun and of the sky, and longed for the feel of
wind on their faces. There was no movement of
air down under the forest-roof, and it was
everlastingly still and dark and stuffy. Even the
dwarves felt it, who were used to tunnelling, and
lived at times for long whiles without the light of
the sun; but the hobbit, who liked holes to make

a house in but not to spend summer days in, felt
that he was being slowly suffocated.

The nights were the worst. It then became
pitch-dark — not what you call pitch-dark, but
really pitch: so black that you really could see
nothing. Bilbo tried flapping his hand in front of
his nose, but he could not see it at all. Well,
perhaps it is not true to say that they could see
nothing: they could see eyes. They slept all
closely huddled together, and took it in turns to
watch; and when it was Bilbo’s turn he would
see gleams in the darkness round them, and
sometimes pairs of yellow or red or green eyes
would stare at him from a little distance, and
then slowly fade and disappear and slowly
shine out again in another place. And
sometimes they would gleam down from the
branches just above him; and that was most
terrifying. But the eyes that he liked the least
were horrible pale bulbous sort of eyes. “Insect
eyes,” he thought, “not animal eyes, only they
are much too big.”

Although it was not yet very cold, they tried
lighting watch-fires at night, but they soon gave
that up. It seemed to bring hundreds and
hundreds of eyes all round them, though the
creatures, whatever they were, were careful
never to let their bodies show in the little flicker
of the flames. Worse still it brought thousands of

dark-grey and black moths, some nearly as big
as your hand, flapping and whirring round their
ears. They could not stand that, nor the huge
bats, black as a top-hat, either; so they gave up
fires and sat at night and dozed in the
enormous uncanny darkness.

All this went on for what seemed to the
hobbit ages upon ages; and he was always
hungry, for they were extremely careful with their
provisions. Even so, as days followed days,
and still the forest seemed just the same, they
began to get anxious. The food would not last
for ever: it was in fact already beginning to get
low. They tried shooting at the squirrels, and
they wasted many arrows before they managed
to bring one down on the path. But when they
roasted it, it proved horrible to taste, and they
shot no more squirrels.

They were thirsty too, for they had none too
much water, and in all the time they had seen
neither spring nor stream. This was their state
when one day they found their path blocked by
a running water. It flowed fast and strong but not
very wide right across the way, and it was
black, or looked it in the gloom. It was well that
Beorn had warned them against it, or they
would have drunk from it, whatever its colour,
and filled some of their emptied skins at its
bank. As it was they only thought of how to

cross it without wetting themselves in its water.
There had been a bridge of wood across, but it
had rotted and fallen leaving only the broken
posts near the bank.

Bilbo kneeling on the brink and peering
forward cried: “There is a boat against the far
bank! Now why couldn’t it have been this side!”

“How far away do you think it is?” asked
Thorin, for by now they knew Bilbo had the
sharpest eyes among them.

"Not at all far. I shouldn’t think above twelve
yards.”

“Twelve yards! I should have thought it was
thirty at least, but my eyes don’t see as well as
they used a hundred years ago. Still twelve
yards is as good as a mile. We can’t jump it,
and we daren’t try to wade or swim.”

“Can any of you throw a rope?”

“What’s the good of that? The boat is sure
to be tied up, even if we could hook it, which I
doubt.”

“I don’t believe it is tied,” said Bilbo, “though
of course I can’t be sure in this light; but it looks
to me as if it was just drawn up on the bank,
which is low just there where the path goes
down into the water.”

“Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the
youngest and still has the best sight,” said
Thorin. “Come here Fili, and see if you can see

the boat Mr. Baggins is talking about.”

Fili thought he could; so when he had stared
a long while to get an idea of the direction, the
others brought him a rope. They had several
with them, and on the end of the longest they
fastened one of the large iron hooks they had
used for catching their packs to the straps
about their shoulders. Fili took this in his hand,
balanced it for a moment, and then flung it
across the stream.

Splash it fell in the water! “Not far enough!”
said Bilbo who was peering forward. “A couple
of feet and you would have dropped it on to the
boat. Try again. I don’t suppose the magic is
strong enough to hurt you, if you just touch a bit
of wet rope.”

Fili picked up the hook when he had drawn
it back, rather doubtfully all the same. This time
he threw it with great strength.

“Steady!” said Bilbo, “you have thrown it
right into the wood on the other side now. Draw
it back gently.” Fili hauled the rope back slowly,
and after a while Bilbo said: “Carefully! It is lying
on the boat; let’s hope the hook will catch.”

It did. The rope went taut, and Fili pulled in
vain. Kili came to his help, and then Oin and
Gloin. They tugged and tugged, and suddenly
they all fell over on their backs. Bilbo was on the
look out, however, caught the rope, and with a

piece of stick fended off the little black boat as
it came rushing across the stream. “Help!” he
shouted, and Balin was just in time to seize the
boat before it floated off down the current.

“It was tied after all,” said he, looking at the
snapped painter that was still dangling from it.
“That was a good pull, my lads; and a good job
that our rope was the stronger.”

“Who’ll cross first?” asked Bilbo.

“I shall,” said Thorin, “and you will come with
me, and Fili and Balin. That’s as many as the
boat will hold at a time. After that Kili and Oin
and Gloin and Dori; next Ori and Nori, Bifur and
Bofur; and last Dwalin and Bombur.”

“I’m always last and I don’t like it,” said
Bombur. “It’s somebody else’s turn today.”

“You should not be so fat. As you are, you
must be with the last and lightest boatload.
Don’t start grumbling against orders, or
something bad will happen to you.”

“There aren’t any oars. How are you going
to push the boat back to the far bank?” asked
the hobbit.

“Give me another length of rope and
another hook,” said Fili, and when they had got
it ready, he cast it into the darkness ahead and
as high as he could throw it. Since it did not fall
down again, they saw that it must have stuck in
the branches. “Get in now,” said Fili, “and one

of you haul on the rope that is stuck in a tree on
the other side. One of the others must keep
hold of the hook we used at first, and when we
are safe on the other side he can hook it on,
and you can draw the boat back.”

In this way they were all soon on the far
bank safe across the enchanted stream. Dwalin
had just scrambled out with the coiled rope on
his arm, and Bombur (still grumbling) was
getting ready to follow, when something bad did
happen. There was a flying sound of hooves on
the path ahead. Out of the gloom came
suddenly the shape of a flying deer, it charged
into the dwarves and bowled them over, then
gathered itself for a leap. High it sprang and
cleared the water with a mighty jump. But it did
not reach the other side in safety. Thorin was
the only one who had kept his feet and his wits.
As soon as they had landed he had bent his
bow and fitted an arrow in case any hidden
guardian of the boat appeared. Now he sent a
swift and sure shot into the leaping beast. As it
reached the further bank it stumbled. The
shadows swallowed it up, but they heard the
sound of hooves quickly falter and then go still.

Before they could shout in praise of the
shot, however, a dreadful wail from Bilbo put all
thoughts of venison out of their minds. “Bombur
has fallen in! Bombur is drowning!” he cried. It

was only too true. Bombur had only one foot on
the land when the hart bore down on him, and
sprang over him. He had stumbled, thrusting the
boat away from the bank, and then toppled
back into the dark water, his hands slipping off
the slimy roots at the edge, while the boat span
slowly off and disappeared.

They could still see his hood above the
water when they ran to the bank. Quickly, they
flung a rope with a hook towards him. His hand
caught it, and they pulled him to the shore. He
was drenched from hair to boots, of course, but
that was not the worst. When they laid him on
the bank he was already fast asleep, with one
hand clutching the rope so tight that they could
not get it from his grasp; and fast asleep he
remained in spite of all they could do.

They were still standing over him, cursing
their ill luck, and Bombur’s clumsiness, and
lamenting the loss of the boat which made it
impossible for them to go back and look for the
hart, when they became aware of the dim
blowing of horns in the wood and the sound as
of dogs baying far off. Then they all fell silent;
and as they sat it seemed they could hear the
noise of a great hunt going by to the north of the
path, though they saw no sign of it.

There they sat for a long while and did not
dare to make a move. Bombur slept on with a

smile on his fat face, as if he no longer cared
for all the troubles that vexed them. Suddenly on
the path ahead appeared some white deer, a
hind and fawns as snowy white as the hart had
been dark. They glimmered in the shadows.
Before Thorin could cry out three of the dwarves
had leaped to their feet and loosed off arrows
from their bows. None seemed to find their
mark. The deer turned and vanished in the trees
as silently as they had come, and in vain the
dwarves shot their arrows after them.

“Stop! stop!” shouted Thorin; but it was too
late, the excited dwarves had wasted their last
arrows, and now the bows that Beorn had given
them were useless.

They were a gloomy party that night, and the
gloom gathered still deeper on them in the
following days. They had crossed the
enchanted stream; but beyond it the path
seemed to straggle on just as before, and in the
forest they could see no change. Yet if they had
known more about it and considered the
meaning of the hunt and the white deer that had
appeared upon their path, they would have
known that they were at last drawing towards
the eastern edge, and would soon have come,
if they could have kept up their courage and
their hope, to thinner trees and places where
the sunlight came again.

But they did not know this, and they were
burdened with the heavy body of Bombur, which
they had to carry along with them as best they
could, taking the wearisome task in turns of four
each while the others shared their packs. If
these had not become all too light in the last few
days, they would never have managed it; but a
slumbering and smiling Bombur was a poor
exchange for packs filled with food however
heavy. In a few days a time came when there
was practically nothing left to eat or to drink.
Nothing wholesome could they see growing in
the wood, only funguses and herbs with pale
leaves and unpleasant smell.

About four days from the enchanted stream
they came to a part where most of the trees
were beeches. They were at first inclined to be
cheered by the change, for here there was no
undergrowth and the shadow was not so deep.
There was a greenish light about them, and in
places they could see some distance to either
side of the path. Yet the light only showed them
endless lines of straight grey trunks like the
pillars of some huge twilight hall. There was a
breath of air and a noise of wind, but it had a
sad sound. A few leaves came rustling down to
remind them that outside autumn was coming
on. Their feet ruffled among the dead leaves of
countless other autumns that drifted over the

banks of the path from the deep red carpets of
the forest.

Still Bombur slept and they grew very
weary. At times they heard disquieting laughter.
Sometimes there was singing in the distance
too. The laughter was the laughter of fair voices
not of goblins, and the singing was beautiful, but
it sounded eerie and strange, and they were not
comforted, rather they hurried on from those
parts with what strength they had left.

Two days later they found their path going
downwards, and before long they were in a
valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth
of oaks.

“Is there no end to this accursed forest?”
said Thorin. “Somebody must climb a tree and
see if he can get his head above the roof and
have a look round. The only way is to choose
the tallest tree that overhangs the path.”

Of course “somebody” meant Bilbo. They
chose him, because to be of any use the
climber must get his head above the topmost
leaves, and so he must be light enough for the
highest and slenderest branches to bear him.
Poor Mr. Baggins had never had much practice
in climbing trees, but they hoisted him up into
the lowest branches of an enormous oak that
grew right out into the path, and up he had to go
as best he could. He pushed his way through

the tangled twigs with many a slap in the eye;
he was greened and grimed from the old bark
of the greater boughs; more than once he
slipped and caught himself just in time; and at
last, after a dreadful struggle in a difficult place
where there seemed to be no convenient
branches at all, he got near the top. All the time
he was wondering whether there were spiders
in the tree, and how he was going to get down
again (except by falling).

In the end he poked his head above the roof
of leaves, and then he found spiders all right.
But they were only small ones of ordinary size,
and they were after the butterflies. Bilbo’s eyes
were nearly blinded by the light. He could hear
the dwarves shouting up at him from far below,
but he could not answer, only hold on and blink.
The sun was shining brilliantly, and it was a long
while before he could bear it. When he could,
he saw all round him a sea of dark green,
ruffled here and there by the breeze; and there
were everywhere hundreds of butterflies. I
expect they were a kind of “purple emperor”, a
butterfly that loves the tops of oak-woods, but
these were not purple at all, they were a dark
dark velvety black without any markings to be
seen.

He looked at the “black emperors” for a
long time, and enjoyed the feel of the breeze in

his hair and on his face; but at length the cries
of the dwarves, who were now simply stamping
with impatience down below, reminded him of
his real business. It was no good. Gaze as
much as he might, he could see no end to the
trees and the leaves in any direction. His heart,
that had been lightened by the sight of the sun
and the feel of the wind, sank back into his toes:
there was no food to go back to down below.

Actually, as I have told you, they were not far
off the edge of the forest; and if Bilbo had had
the sense to see it, the tree that he had
climbed, though it was tall in itself, was standing
near the bottom of a wide valley, so that from its
top the trees seemed to swell up all round like
the edges of a great bowl, and he could not
expect to see how far the forest lasted. Still he
did not see this, and he climbed down full of
despair. He got to the bottom again at last,
scratched, hot, and miserable, and he could not
see anything in the gloom below when he got
there. His report soon made the others as
miserable as he was.

“The forest goes on for ever and ever and
ever in all directions! Whatever shall we do?
And what is the use of sending a hobbit!" they
cried, as if it was his fault. They did not care
tuppence about the butterflies, and were only
made more angry when he told them of the

beautiful breeze, which they were too heavy to
climb up and feel.

That night they ate their very last scraps and
crumbs of food; and next morning when they
woke the first thing they noticed was that they
were still gnawingly hungry, and the next thing
was that it was raining and that here and there
the drip of it was dropping heavily on the forest
floor. That only reminded them that they were
also parchingly thirsty, without doing anything to
relieve them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst
by standing under giant oaks and waiting for a
chance drip to fall on your tongue. The only
scrap of comfort there was came unexpectedly
from Bombur.

He woke up suddenly and sat up scratching
his head. He could not make out where he was
at all, nor why he felt so hungry; for he had
forgotten everything that had happened since
they started their journey that May morning long
ago. The last thing that he remembered was the
party at the hobbit’s house, and they had great
difficulty in making him believe their tale of all
the many adventures they had had since.

When he heard that there was nothing to
eat, he sat down and wept, for he felt very weak

and wobbly in the legs. “Why ever did I wake
up!” he cried. “I was having such beautiful
dreams. I dreamed I was walking in a forest
rather like this one, only lit with torches on the
trees and lamps swinging from the branches
and fires burning on the ground; and there was
a great feast going on, going on for ever. A
woodland king was there with a crown of
leaves, and there was a merry singing, and I
could not count or describe the things there
were to eat and drink.”

“You need not try,” said Thorin. “In fact if you
can’t talk about something else, you had better
be silent. We are quite annoyed enough with
you as it is. If you hadn’t waked up, we should
have left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest;
you are no joke to carry even after weeks of
short commons.”

There was nothing now to be done but to
tighten the belts round their empty stomachs,
and hoist their empty sacks and packs, and
trudge along the track without any great hope of
ever getting to the end before they lay down and
died of starvation. This they did all that day,
going very slowly and wearily; while Bombur
kept on wailing that his legs would not carry him
and that he wanted to lie down and sleep.

“No you don’t!” they said. “Let your legs
take their share, we have carried you far

enough.”

All the same he suddenly refused to go a
step further and flung himself on the ground. “Go
on, if you must,” he said. “I’m just going to lie
here and sleep and dream of food, if I can’t get
it any other way. I hope I never wake up again.”

At that very moment Balin, who was a little
way ahead, called out: “What was that? I
thought I saw a twinkle of light in the forest.”

They all looked, and a longish way off, it
seemed, they saw a red twinkle in the dark;
then another and another sprang out beside it.
Even Bombur got up, and they hurried along
then, not caring if it was trolls or goblins. The
light was in front of them and to the left of the
path, and when at last they had drawn level with
it, it seemed plain that torches and fires were
burning under the trees, but a good way off their
track.

“It looks as if my dreams were coming true,”
gasped Bombur puffing up behind. He wanted
to rush straight off into the wood after the lights.
But the others remembered only too well the
warnings of the wizard and of Beorn.

“A feast would be no good, if we never got
back alive from it,” said Thorin.

“But without a feast we shan’t remain alive
much longer anyway,” said Bombur, and Bilbo
heartily agreed with him. They argued about it

backwards and forwards for a long while, until
they agreed at length to send out a couple of
spies, to creep near the lights and find out more
about them. But then they could not agree on
who was to be sent: no one seemed anxious to
run the chance of being lost and never finding
his friends again. In the end, in spite of
warnings, hunger decided them, because
Bombur kept on describing all the good things
that were being eaten, according to his dream,
in the woodland feast; so they all left the path
and plunged into the forest together.

After a good deal of creeping and crawling
they peered round the trunks and looked into a
clearing where some trees had been felled and
the ground levelled. There were many people
there, elvish-looking folk, all dressed in green
and brown and sitting on sawn rings of the
felled trees in a great circle. There was a fire in
their midst and there were torches fastened to
some of the trees round about; but most
splendid sight of all: they were eating and
drinking and laughing merrily.

The smell of the roast meats was so
enchanting that, without waiting to consult one
another, every one of them got up and
scrambled forwards into the ring with the one
idea of begging for some food. No sooner had
the first stepped into the clearing than all the

lights went out as if by magic. Somebody
kicked the fire and it went up in rockets of
glittering sparks and vanished. They were lost
in a completely lightless dark and they could not
even find one another, not for a long time at any
rate. After blundering frantically in the gloom,
falling over logs, bumping crash into trees, and
shouting and calling till they must have waked
everything in the forest for miles, at last they
managed to gather themselves in a bundle and
count themselves by touch. By that time they
had, of course, quite forgotten in what direction
the path lay, and they were all hopelessly lost, at
least till morning.

There was nothing for it but to settle down
for the night where they were; they did not even
dare to search on the ground for scraps of food
for fear of becoming separated again. But they
had not been lying long, and Bilbo was only just
getting drowsy, when Dori, whose turn it was to
watch first, said in a loud whisper:

“The lights are coming out again over there,
and there are more than ever of them.”

Up they all jumped. There, sure enough, not
far away were scores of twinkling lights, and
they heard the voices and the laughter quite
plainly. They crept slowly towards them, in a
single line, each touching the back of the one in
front. When they got near Thorin said: “No

rushing forward this time! No one is to stir from
hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone
first to talk to them. They won’t be frightened of
him — (‘What about me of them?’ thought Bilbo)
— and any way I hope they won’t do anything
nasty to him.”

When they got to the edge of the circle of
lights they pushed Bilbo suddenly from behind.
Before he had time to slip on his ring, he
stumbled forward into the full blaze of the fire
and torches. It was no good. Out went all the
lights again and complete darkness fell.

If it had been difficult collecting themselves
before, it was far worse this time. And they
simply could not find the hobbit. Every time they
counted themselves it only made thirteen. They
shouted and called: “Bilbo Baggins! Hobbit!
You dratted hobbit! Hi! hobbit, confusticate you,
where are you?” and other things of that sort,
but there was no answer.

They were just giving up hope, when Dori
stumbled across him by sheer luck. In the dark
he fell over what he thought was a log, and he
found it was the hobbit curled up fast asleep. It
took a deal of shaking to wake him, and when
he was awake he was not pleased at all.

“I was having such a lovely dream,” he
grumbled, “all about having a most gorgeous
dinner.”

“Good heavens! he has gone like Bombur,”
they said. “Don’t tell us about dreams. Dream-
dinners aren’t any good, and we can’t share
them.”

“They are the best I am likely to get in this
beastly place,” he muttered, as he lay down
beside the dwarves and tried to go back to
sleep and find his dream again.

But that was not the last of the lights in the
forest. Later when the night must have been
getting old, Kili who was watching then, came
and roused them all again, saying:

“There’s a regular blaze of light begun not
far away — hundreds of torches and many fires
must have been lit suddenly and by magic. And
hark to the singing and the harps!”

After lying and listening for a while, they
found they could not resist the desire to go
nearer and try once more to get help. Up they
got again; and this time the result was
disastrous. The feast that they now saw was
greater and more magnificent than before; and
at the head of a long line of feasters sat a
woodland king with a crown of leaves upon his
golden hair, very much as Bombur had
described the figure in his dream. The elvish
folk were passing bowls from hand to hand and
across the fires, and some were harping and
many were singing. Their gleaming hair was

twined with flowers; green and white gems
glinted on their collars and their belts; and their
faces and their songs were filled with mirth.
Loud and clear and fair were those songs, and
out stepped Thorin in to their midst.

Dead silence fell in the middle of a word.
Out went all light. The fires leaped up in black
smokes. Ashes and cinders were in the eyes of
the dwarves, and the wood was filled again with
their clamour and their cries.

Bilbo found himself running round and round
(as he thought) and calling and calling: “Dori,
Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur,
Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield,” while
people he could not see or feel were doing the
same all round him (with an occasional “Bilbo!”
thrown in). But the cries of the others got
steadily further and fainter, and though after a
while it seemed to him they changed to yells
and cries for help in the far distance, all noise at
last died right away, and he was left alone in
complete silence and darkness.

That was one of his most miserable moments.
But he soon made up his mind that it was no
good trying to do anything till day came with
some little light, and quite useless to go

blundering about tiring himself out with no hope
of any breakfast to revive him. So he sat himself
down with his back to a tree, and not for the last
time fell to thinking of his far-distant hobbit-hole
with its beautiful pantries. He was deep in
thoughts of bacon and eggs and toast and
butter when he felt something touch him.
Something like a strong sticky string was
against his left hand, and when he tried to move
he found that his legs were already wrapped in
the same stuff, so that when he got up he fell
over.

Then the great spider, who had been busy
tying him up while he dozed, came from behind
him and came at him. He could only see the
thing’s eyes, but he could feel its hairy legs as it
struggled to wind its abominable threads round
and round him. It was lucky that he had come to
his senses in time. Soon he would not have
been able to move at all. As it was, he had a
desperate fight before he got free. He beat the
creature off with his hands — it was trying to
poison him to keep him quiet, as small spiders
do to flies — until he remembered his sword and
drew it out. Then the spider jumped back, and
he had time to cut his legs loose. After that it
was his turn to attack. The spider evidently was
not used to things that carried such stings at
their sides, or it would have hurried away

quicker. Bilbo came at it before it could
disappear and stuck it with his sword right in
the eyes. Then it went mad and leaped and
danced and flung out its legs in horrible jerks,
until he killed it with another stroke; and then he
fell down and remembered nothing more for a
long while.

There was the usual dim grey light of the
forest-day about him when he came to his
senses. The spider lay dead beside him, and
his sword-blade was stained black. Somehow
the killing of the giant spider, all alone by
himself in the dark without the help of the wizard
or the dwarves or of anyone else, made a great
difference to Mr. Baggins. He felt a different
person, and much fiercer and bolder in spite of
an empty stomach, as he wiped his sword on
the grass and put it back into its sheath.

“I will give you a name,” he said to it, “and I
shall call you Sting.”

After that he set out to explore. The forest
was grim and silent, but obviously he had first of
all to look for his friends, who were not likely to
be very far off, unless they had been made
prisoners by the elves (or worse things). Bilbo
felt that it was unsafe to shout, and he stood a
long while wondering in what direction the path
lay, and in what direction he should go first to
look for the dwarves.

“O! why did we not remember Beorn’s
advice, and Gandalfs!” he lamented. “What a
mess we are in now! We! I only wish it was i/ie:
it is horrible being all alone.”

In the end he made as good a guess as he
could at the direction from which the cries for
help had come in the night — and by luck (he
was born with a good share of it) he guessed
more or less right, as you will see. Having made
up his mind he crept along as cleverly as he
could. Hobbits are clever at quietness,
especially in woods, as I have already told you;
also Bilbo had slipped on his ring before he
started. That is why the spiders neither saw nor
heard him coming.

He had picked his way stealthily for some
distance, when he noticed a place of dense
black shadow ahead of him, black even for that
forest, like a patch of midnight that had never
been cleared away. As he drew nearer, he saw
that it was made by spider-webs one behind
and over and tangled with another. Suddenly he
saw, too, that there were spiders huge and
horrible sitting in the branches above him, and
ring or no ring he trembled with fear lest they
should discover him. Standing behind a tree he
watched a group of them for some time, and
then in the silence and stillness of the wood he
realised that these loathsome creatures were

speaking one to another. Their voices were a
sort of thin creaking and hissing, but he could
make out many of the words that they said.
They were talking about the dwarves!

“It was a sharp struggle, but worth it,” said
one. “What nasty thick skins they have to be
sure, but I'll wager there is good juice inside.”

“Aye, they’ll make fine eating, when they’ve
hung a bit,” said another.

“Don’t hang ’em too long,” said a third.
“They’re not as fat as they might be. Been
feeding none too well of late, I should guess.”

“Kill ’em, I say,” hissed a fourth; “kill ’em
now and hang ’em dead for a while.”

“They’re dead now, I’ll warrant,” said the
first.

“That they are not. I saw one a-struggling
just now. Just coming round again, I should say,
after a bee-autiful sleep. I’ll show you.”

With that one of the fat spiders ran along a
rope till it came to a dozen bundles hanging in a
row from a high branch. Bilbo was horrified,
now that he noticed them for the first time
dangling in the shadows, to see a dwarvish foot
sticking out of the bottoms of some of the
bundles, or here and there the tip of a nose, or
a bit of beard or of a hood.

To the fattest of these bundles the spider
went — “It is poor old Bombur, I’ll bet,” thought

Bilbo — and nipped hard at the nose that stuck
out. There was a muffled yelp inside, and a toe
shot up and kicked the spider straight and hard.
There was life in Bombur still. There was a
noise like the kicking of a flabby football, and
the enraged spider fell off the branch, only
catching itself with its own thread just in time.

The others laughed. “You were quite right,”
they said, “the meat’s alive and kicking!”

“I’ll soon put an end to that,” hissed the
angry spider climbing back onto the branch.

Bilbo saw that the moment had come when he
must do something. He could not get up at the
brutes and he had nothing to shoot with; but
looking about he saw that in this place there
were many stones lying in what appeared to be
a now dry little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty
fair shot with a stone, and it did not take him
long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that
fitted his hand cosily. As a boy he used to
practise throwing stones at things, until rabbits
and squirrels, and even birds, got out of his way
as quick as lightning if they saw him stoop; and
even grownup he had still spent a deal of his
time at quoits, dart-throwing, shooting at the
wand, bowls, ninepins and other quiet games of

the aiming and throwing sort — indeed he could
do lots of things, besides blowing smoke-rings,
asking riddles and cooking, that I haven’t had
time to tell you about. There is no time now.
While he was picking up stones, the spider had
reached Bombur, and soon he would have
been dead. At that moment Bilbo threw. The
stone struck the spider plunk on the head, and it
dropped senseless off the tree, flop to the
ground, with all its legs curled up.

The next stone went whizzing through a big
web, snapping its cords, and taking off the
spider sitting in the middle of it, whack, dead.
After that there was a deal of commotion in the
spider-colony, and they forgot the dwarves for a
bit, I can tell you. They could not see Bilbo, but
they could make a good guess at the direction
from which the stones were coming. As quick
as lightning they came running and swinging
towards the hobbit, flinging out their long
threads in all directions, till the air seemed full of
waving snares.

Bilbo, however, soon slipped away to a
different place. The idea came to him to lead
the furious spiders further and further away from
the dwarves, if he could; to make them curious,
excited and angry all at once. When about fifty
had gone off to the place where he had stood
before, he threw some more stones at these,

and at others that had stopped behind; then
dancing among the trees he began to sing a
song to infuriate them and bring them all after
him, and also to let the dwarves hear his voice.

This is what he sang:

Old fat spider spinning in a tree!

Old fat spider cant see me!
Attercop! Attercop!

Wont you stop,

Stop your spinning and look forme?

Old Tomnoddy, all big body,

Old Tomnoddy cant spy me!
Attercop! Attercop!

Down you drop!

Youll never catch me up your tree!

Not very good perhaps, but then you must
remember that he had to make it up himself, on
the spur of a very awkward moment. It did what
he wanted any way. As he sang he threw some
more stones and stamped. Practically all the
spiders in the place came after him: some

dropped to the ground, others raced along the
branches, swung from tree to tree, or cast new
ropes across the dark spaces. They made for
his noise far quicker than he had expected.
They were frightfully angry. Quite apart from the
stones no spider has ever liked being called
Attercop, and Tomnoddy of course is insulting
to anybody.

Off Bilbo scuttled to a fresh place, but
several of the spiders had run now to different
points in the glade where they lived, and were
busy spinning webs across all the spaces
between the tree-stems. Very soon the hobbit
would be caught in a thick fence of them all
round him — that at least was the spiders’ idea.
Standing now in the middle of the hunting and
spinning insects Bilbo plucked up his courage
and began a new song:

Lazy Lob and crazy Cob
are weaving webs to wind me.

I am far more sweet than other meat,
but still they cannot find me!

Here am I, naughty little fly;

you are fat and lazy.

You cannot trap me, though you try,
in your cobwebs crazy.

With that he turned and found that the last
space between two tall trees had been closed
with a web — but luckily not a proper web, only
great strands of double-thick spider-rope run
hastily backwards and forwards from trunk to
trunk. Out came his little sword. He slashed the
threads to pieces and went off singing.

The spiders saw the sword, though I don’t
suppose they knew what it was, and at once the
whole lot of them came hurrying after the hobbit
along the ground and the branches, hairy legs
waving, nippers and spinners snapping, eyes
popping, full of froth and rage. They followed
him into the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as
he dared. Then quieter than a mouse he stole
back.

He had precious little time, he knew, before
the spiders were disgusted and came back to
their trees where the dwarves were hung. In the
meanwhile he had to rescue them. The worst
part of the job was getting up on to the long
branch where the bundles were dangling. I don’t
suppose he would have managed it, if a spider
had not luckily left a rope hanging down; with its

help, though it stuck to his hand and hurt him, he
scrambled up — only to meet an old slow wicked
fat-bodied spider who had remained behind to
guard the prisoners, and had been busy
pinching them to see which was the juiciest to
eat. it had thought of starting the feast while the
others were away, but Mr. Baggins was in a
hurry, and before the spider knew what was
happening it felt his sting and rolled off the
branch dead.

Bilbo’s next job was to loose a dwarf. What
was he to do? If he cut the string which hung
him up, the wretched dwarf would tumble thump
to the ground a good way below. Wriggling
along the branch (which made all the poor
dwarves dance and dangle like ripe fruit) he
reached the first bundle.

“Fili or Kili,” he thought by the tip of a blue
hood sticking out at the top. “Most likely Fili," he
thought by the tip of a long nose poking out of
the winding threads. He managed by leaning
over to cut most of the strong sticky threads that
bound him round, and then, sure enough, with a
kick and a struggle most of Fili emerged. I am
afraid Bilbo actually laughed at the sight of him
jerking his stiff arms and legs as he danced on
the spider-string under his armpits, just like one
of those funny toys bobbing on a wire.

Somehow or other Fili was got on to the

branch, and then he did his best to help the
hobbit, although he was feeling very sick and ill
from spider-poison, and from hanging most of
the night and the next day wound round and
round with only his nose to breathe through. It
took him ages to get the beastly stuff out of his
eyes and eyebrows, and as for his beard, he
had to cut most of it off. Well, between them
they started to haul up first one dwarf and then
another and slash them free. None of them
were better off than Fili, and some of them were
worse. Some had hardly been able to breathe
at all (long noses are sometimes useful you
see) and some had been more poisoned.

In this way they rescued Kili, Bifur, Bofur,
Dori and Nori. Poor old Bombur was so
exhausted — he was the fattest and had been
constantly pinched and poked — that he just
rolled off the branch and fell plop on to the
ground, fortunately on to leaves, and lay there.
But there were still five dwarves hanging at the
end of the branch when the spiders began to
come back, more full of rage than ever.

Bilbo immediately went to the end of the
branch nearest the tree-trunk and kept back
those that crawled up. He had taken off his ring
when he rescued Fili and forgotten to put it on
again, so now they all began to splutter and
hiss:

“Now we see you, you nasty little creature!
We will eat you and leave your bones and skin
hanging on a tree. Ugh! he’s got a sting has
he? Well, we’ll get him all the same, and then
we’ll hang him head downwards for a day or
two.”

While this was going on, the other dwarves
were working at the rest of the captives, and
cutting at the threads with their knives. Soon all
would be free, though it was not clear what
would happen after that. The spiders had
caught them pretty easily the night before, but
that had been unawares and in the dark. This
time there looked like being a horrible battle.

Suddenly Bilbo noticed that some of the
spiders had gathered round old Bombur on the
floor, and had tied him up again and were
dragging him away. He gave a shout and
slashed at the spiders in front of him. They
quickly gave way, and he scrambled and fell
down the tree right into the middle of those on
the ground. His little sword was something new
in the way of stings for them. How it darted to
and fro! It shone with delight as he stabbed at
them. Half a dozen were killed before the rest
drew off and left Bombur to Bilbo.

“Come down! Come down!” he shouted to
the dwarves on the branch. “Don’t stay up there
and be netted!” For he saw spiders swarming

up all the neighbouring trees, and crawling
along the boughs above the heads of the
dwarves.

Down the dwarves scrambled or jumped or
dropped, eleven all in a heap, most of them very
shaky and little use on their legs. There they
were at last, twelve of them counting poor old
Bombur, who was being propped up on either
side by his cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur;
and Bilbo was dancing about and waving his
Sting; and hundreds of angry spiders were
goggling at them all round and about and
above. It looked pretty hopeless.

Then the battle began. Some of the
dwarves had knives, and some had sticks, and
all of them could get at stones; and Bilbo had
his elvish dagger. Again and again the spiders
were beaten off, and many of them were killed.
But it could not go on for long. Bilbo was nearly
tired out; only four of the dwarves were able to
stand firmly, and soon they would all be
overpowered like weary flies. Already the
spiders were beginning to weave their webs all
round them again from tree to tree.

In the end Bilbo could think of no plan
except to let the dwarves into the secret of his
ring. He was rather sorry about it, but it could
not be helped.

“I am going to disappear,” he said. “I shall

draw the spiders off, if I can; and you must keep
together and make in the opposite direction. To
the left there, that is more or less the way
towards the place where we last saw the elf-
fires.”

It was difficult to get them to understand,
what with their dizzy heads, and the shouts, and
the whacking of sticks and the throwing of
stones; but at last Bilbo felt he could delay no
longer — the spiders were drawing their circle
ever closer. He suddenly slipped on his ring,
and to the great astonishment of the dwarves
he vanished.

Soon there came the sound of “Lazy Lob”
and “Attercop” from among the trees away on
the right. That upset the spiders greatly. They
stopped advancing, and some went off in the
direction of the voice. “Attercop” made them so
angry that they lost their wits. Then Balin, who
had grasped Bilbo’s plan better than the rest,
led an attack. The dwarves huddled together in
a knot, and sending a shower of stones they
drove at the spiders on the left, and burst
through the ring. Away behind them now the
shouting and singing suddenly stopped.

Hoping desperately that Bilbo had not been
caught the dwarves went on. Not fast enough,
though. They were sick and weary, and they
could not go much better than a hobble and a

wobble, though many of the spiders were close
behind. Every now and then they had to turn and
fight the creatures that were overtaking them;
and already some spiders were in the trees
above them and throwing down their long
clinging threads.

Things were looking pretty bad again, when
suddenly Bilbo reappeared, and charged into
the astonished spiders unexpectedly from the
side.

“Go on! Go on!” he shouted. “I will do the
stinging!”

And he did. He darted backwards and
forwards, slashing at spider-threads, hacking at
their legs, and stabbing at their fat bodies if
they came too near. The spiders swelled with
rage, and spluttered and frothed, and hissed
out horrible curses; but they had become
mortally afraid of Sting, and dared not come
very near, now that it had come back. So curse
as they would, their prey moved slowly but
steadily away. It was a most terrible business,
and seemed to take hours. But at last, just when
Bilbo felt that he could not lift his hand for a
single stroke more, the spiders suddenly gave it
up, and followed them no more, but went back
disappointed to their dark colony.

The dwarves then noticed that they had
come to the edge of a ring where elf-fires had

been. Whether it was one of those they had
seen the night before, they could not tell. But it
seemed that some good magic lingered in such
spots, which the spiders did not like. At any rate
here the light was greener, and the boughs less
thick and threatening, and they had a chance to
rest and draw breath.

There they lay for some time, puffing and
panting. But very soon they began to ask
questions. They had to have the whole
vanishing business carefully explained, and the
finding of the ring interested them so much that
for a while they forgot their own troubles. Balin
in particular insisted on having the Gollum story,
riddles and all, told all over again, with the ring
in its proper place. But after a time the light
began to fail, and then other questions were
asked. Where were they, and where was their
path, and where was there any food, and what
were they going to do next? These questions
they asked over and over again, and it was
from little Bilbo that they seemed to expect to
get the answers. From which you can see that
they had changed their opinion of Mr. Baggins
very much, and had begun to have a great
respect for him (as Gandalf had said they
would). Indeed they really expected him to think
of some wonderful plan for helping them, and
were not merely grumbling. They knew only too

well that they would soon all have been dead, if
it had not been for the hobbit; and they thanked
him many times. Some of them even got up and
bowed right to the ground before him, though
they fell over with the effort, and could not get on
their legs again for some time. Knowing the
truth about the vanishing did not lessen their
opinion of Bilbo at all; for they saw that he had
some wits, as well as luck and a magic ring —
and all three are very useful possessions. In fact
they praised him so much that Bilbo began to
feel there really was something of a bold
adventurer about himself after all, though he
would have felt a lot bolder still, if there had
been anything to eat.

But there was nothing, nothing at all; and
none of them were fit to go and look for
anything, or to search for the lost path. The lost
path! No other idea would come into Bilbo’s
tired head. He just sat staring in front of him at
the endless trees; and after a while they all fell
silent again. All except Balin. Long after the
others had stopped talking and shut their eyes,
he kept on muttering and chuckling to himself.

“Gollum! Well I’m blest! So that’s how he
sneaked past me, is it? Now I know! Just crept
quietly along did you, Mr. Baggins? Buttons all
over the doorstep! Good old Bilbo — Bilbo —
Bilbo — bo — bo — bo — ” And then he fell asleep,

and there was complete silence for a long
while.

All of a sudden Dwalin opened an eye, and
looked round at them. “Where is Thorin?” he
asked.

It was a terrible shock. Of course there were
only thirteen of them, twelve dwarves and the
hobbit. Where indeed was Thorin? They
wondered what evil fate had befallen him,
magic or dark monsters; and shuddered as
they lay lost in the forest. There they dropped off
one by one into uncomfortable sleep full of
horrible dreams, as evening wore to black
night; and there we must leave them for the
present, too sick and weary to set guards or to
take turns at watching.

Thorin had been caught much faster than
they had. You remember Bilbo falling like a log
into sleep, as he stepped into a circle of light?
The next time it had been Thorin who stepped
forward, and as the lights went out he fell like a
stone enchanted. All the noise of the dwarves
lost in the night, their cries as the spiders
caught them and bound them, and all the
sounds of the battle next day, had passed over
him unheard. Then the Wood-elves had come
to him, and bound him, and carried him away.

The feasting people were Wood-elves, of
course. These are not wicked folk. If they have a

fault it is distrust of strangers. Though their
magic was strong, even in those days they were
wary. They differed from the High Elves of the
West, and were more dangerous and less wise.
For most of them (together with their scattered
relations in the hills and mountains) were
descended from the ancient tribes that never
went to Faerie in the West. There the Light-
elves and the Deep-elves and the Sea-elves
went and lived for ages, and grew fairer and
wiser and more learned, and invented their
magic and their cunning craft in the making of
beautiful and marvellous things, before some
came back into the Wide World. In the Wide
World the Wood-elves lingered in the twilight of
our Sun and Moon, but loved best the stars; and
they wandered in the great forests that grew tall
in lands that are now lost. They dwelt most often
by the edges of the woods, from which they
could escape at times to hunt, or to ride and run
over the open lands by moonlight or starlight;
and after the coming of Men they took ever
more and more to the gloaming and the dusk.
Still elves they were and remain, and that is
Good People.

In a great cave some miles within the edge
of Mirkwood on its eastern side there lived at
this time their greatest king. Before his huge
doors of stone a river ran out of the heights of

the forest and flowed on and out into the
marshes at the feet of the high wooded lands.
This great cave, from which countless smaller
ones opened out on every side, wound far
underground and had many passages and wide
halls; but it was lighter and more wholesome
than any goblin-dwelling, and neither so deep
nor so dangerous. In fact the subjects of the
king mostly lived and hunted in the open woods,
and had houses or huts on the ground and in
the branches. The beeches were their favourite
trees. The king’s cave was his palace, and the
strong place of his treasure, and the fortress of
his people against their enemies.

It was also the dungeon of his prisoners. So
to the cave they dragged Thorin — not too gently,
for they did not love dwarves, and thought he
was an enemy. In ancient days they had had
wars with some of the dwarves, whom they
accused of stealing their treasure. It is only fair
to say that the dwarves gave a different
account, and said that they only took what was
their due, for the elf-king had bargained with
them to shape his raw gold and silver, and had
afterwards refused to give them their pay. If the
elf-king had a weakness it was for treasure,
especially for silver and white gems; and though
his hoard was rich, he was ever eager for more,
since he had not yet as great a treasure as

other elf-lords of old. His people neither mined
nor worked metals or jewels, nor did they bother
much with trade or with tilling the earth. All this
was well known to every dwarf, though Thorin’s
family had had nothing to do with the old quarrel
I have spoken of. Consequently Thorin was
angry at their treatment of him, when they took
their spell off him and he came to his senses;
and also he was determined that no word of
gold or jewels should be dragged out of him.

The king looked sternly on Thorin, when he
was brought before him, and asked him many
questions. But Thorin would only say that he
was starving.

“Why did you and your folk three times try to
attack my people at their merrymaking?” asked
the king.

“We did not attack them,” answered Thorin;
“we came to beg, because we were starving.”

“Where are your friends now, and what are
they doing?”

“I don’t know, but I expect starving in the
forest.”

“What were you doing in the forest?”

“Looking for food and drink, because we
were starving.”

“But what brought you into the forest at all?”
asked the king angrily.

At that Thorin shut his mouth and would not

say another word.

“Very well!” said the king. “Take him away
and keep him safe, until he feels inclined to tell
the truth, even if he waits a hundred years.”

Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut
him in one of the inmost caves with strong
wooden doors, and left him. They gave him
food and drink, plenty of both, if not very fine; for
Wood-elves were not goblins, and were
reasonably well-behaved even to their worst
enemies, when they captured them. The giant
spiders were the only living things that they had
no mercy upon.

There in the king’s dungeon poor Thorin lay;
and after he had got over his thankfulness for
bread and meat and water, he began to wonder
what had become of his unfortunate friends. It
was not very long before he discovered; but that
belongs to the next chapter and the beginning
of another adventure in which the hobbit again
showed his usefulness.

Chapter IX

BARRELS OUT OF BOND

The day after the battle with the spiders Bilbo
and the dwarves made one last despairing
effort to find a way out before they died of
hunger and thirst. They got up and staggered on
in the direction which eight out of the thirteen of
them guessed to be the one in which the path
lay; but they never found out if they were right.
Such day as there ever was in the forest was
fading once more into the blackness of night,
when suddenly out sprang the light of many
torches all round them, like hundreds of red
stars. Out leaped Wood-elves with their bows
and spears and called the dwarves to halt.

There was no thought of a fight. Even if the
dwarves had not been in such a state that they
were actually glad to be captured, their small
knives, the only weapons they had, would have
been of no use against the arrows of the elves
that could hit a bird's eye in the dark. So they
simply stopped dead and sat down and waited
— all except Bilbo, who popped on his ring and

slipped quickly to one side. That is why, when
the elves bound the dwarves in a long line, one
behind the other, and counted them, they never
found or counted the hobbit.

Nor did they hear or feel him trotting along
well behind their torch-light as they led off their
prisoners into the forest. Each dwarf was
blindfold, but that did not make much difference,
for even Bilbo with the use of his eyes could not
see where they were going, and neither he nor
the others knew where they had started from
anyway. Bilbo had all he could do to keep up
with the torches, for the elves were making the
dwarves go as fast as ever they could, sick and
weary as they were. The king had ordered them
to make haste. Suddenly the torches stopped,
and the hobbit had just time to catch them up
before they began to cross the bridge. This was
the bridge that led across the river to the king’s
doors. The water flowed dark and swift and
strong beneath; and at the far end were gates
before the mouth of a huge cave that ran into
the side of a steep slope covered with trees.
There the great beeches came right down to
the bank, till their feet were in the stream.

Across the bridge the elves thrust their
prisoners, but Bilbo hesitated in the rear. He
did not at all like the look of the cavern-mouth,
and he only made up his mind not to desert his
friends just in time to scuttle over at the heels of
the last elves, before the great gates of the king

closed behind them with a clang.

Inside the passages were lit with red torch-
light, and the elf-guards sang as they marched
along the twisting, crossing, and echoing paths.
These were not like those of the goblin-cities;
they were smaller, less deep underground, and
filled with a cleaner air. In a great hall with pillars
hewn out of the living stone sat the Elvenking on
a chair of carven wood. On his head was a
crown of berries and red leaves, for the autumn
was come again. In the spring he wore a crown
of woodland flowers. In his hand he held a
carven staff of oak.

The Elvenking's Gate.

The prisoners were brought before him; and
though he looked grimly at them, he told his
men to unbind them, for they were ragged and
weary. “Besides they need no ropes in here,”
said he. “There is no escape from my magic
doors for those who are once brought inside.”

Long and searchingly he questioned the
dwarves about their doings, and where they
were going to, and where they were coming
from; but he got little more news out of them
than out of Thorin. They were surly and angry
and did not even pretend to be polite.

“What have we done, O king?” said Balin,
who was the eldest left. “Is it a crime to be lost
in the forest, to be hungry and thirsty, to be
trapped by spiders? Are the spiders your tame
beasts or your pets, if killing them makes you
angry?”

Such a question of course made the king
angrier than ever, and he answered: “It is a
crime to wander in my realm without leave. Do
you forget that you were in my kingdom, using
the road that my people made? Did you not
three times pursue and trouble my people in the
forest and rouse the spiders with your riot and
clamour? After all the disturbance you have
made I have a right to know what brings you
here, and if you will not tell me now, I will keep
you all in prison until you have learned sense
and manners!”

Then he ordered the dwarves each to be
put in a separate cell and to be given food and
drink, but not to be allowed to pass the doors of
their little prisons, until one at least of them was
willing to tell him all he wanted to know. But he
did not tell them that Thorin was also a prisoner
with him. It was Bilbo who found that out.

Poor Mr. Baggins — it was a weary long time
that he lived in that place all alone, and always
in hiding, never daring to take off his ring, hardly

daring to sleep, even tucked away in the
darkest and remotest corners he could find. For
something to do he took to wandering about the
Elvenking's palace. Magic shut the gates, but
he could sometimes get out, if he was quick.
Companies of the Wood-elves, sometimes with
the king at their head, would from time to time
ride out to hunt, or to other business in the
woods and in the lands to the East. Then if
Bilbo was very nimble, he could slip out just
behind them; though it was a dangerous thing to
do. More than once he was nearly caught in the
doors, as they clashed together when the last
elf passed; yet he did not dare to march among
them because of his shadow (altogether thin
and wobbly as it was in torchlight), or for fear of
being bumped into and discovered. And when
he did go out, which was not very often, he did
no good. Fie did not wish to desert the dwarves,
and indeed he did not know where in the world
to go without them. He could not keep up with
the hunting elves all the time they were out, so
he never discovered the ways out of the wood,
and was left to wander miserably in the forest,
terrified of losing himself, until a chance came
of returning. He was hungry too outside, for he
was no hunter; but inside the caves he could
pick up a living of some sort by stealing food
from store or table when no one was at hand.

“I am like a burglar that can’t get away, but
must go on miserably burgling the same house

day after day,” he thought. “This is the dreariest
and dullest part of all this wretched, tiresome,
uncomfortable adventure! I wish I was back in
my hobbit-hole by my own warm fireside with
the lamp shining!” He often wished, too, that he
could get a message for help sent to the wizard,
but that of course was quite impossible; and he
soon realized that if anything was to be done, it
would have to be done by Mr. Baggins, alone
and unaided.

Eventually, after a week or two of this
sneaking sort of life, by watching and following
the guards and taking what chances he could,
he managed to find out where each dwarf was
kept. He found all their twelve cells in different
parts of the palace, and after a time he got to
know his way about very well. What was his
surprise one day to overhear some of the
guards talking and to learn that there was
another dwarf in prison too, in a specially deep
dark place. He guessed at once, of course, that
that was Thorin; and after a while he found that
his guess was right. At last after many
difficulties he managed to find the place when
no one was about, and to have a word with the
chief of the dwarves.

Thorin was too wretched to be angry any
longer at his misfortunes, and was even
beginning to think of telling the king all about his
treasure and his quest (which shows how low-
spirited he had become), when he heard

Bilbo’s little voice at his keyhole. He could
hardly believe his ears. Soon however he made
up his mind that he could not be mistaken, and
he came to the door and had a long whispered
talk with the hobbit on the other side.

So it was that Bilbo was able to take
secretly Thorin's message to each of the other
imprisoned dwarves, telling them that Thorin
their chief was also in prison close at hand, and
that no one was to reveal their errand to the
king, not yet, nor before Thorin gave the word.
For Thorin had taken heart again hearing how
the hobbit had rescued his companions from
the spiders, and was determined once more
not to ransom himself with promises to the king
of a share in the treasure, until all hope of
escaping in any other way had disappeared;
until in fact the remarkable Mr. Invisible Baggins
(of whom he began to have a very high opinion
indeed) had altogether failed to think of
something clever.

The other dwarves quite agreed when they
got the message. They all thought their own
shares in the treasure (which they quite
regarded as theirs, in spite of their plight and
the still unconquered dragon) would suffer
seriously if the Wood-elves claimed part of it,
and they all trusted Bilbo. Just what Gandalf had
said would happen, you see. Perhaps that was
part of his reason for going off and leaving
them.

Bilbo, however, did not feel nearly so
hopeful as they did. He did not like being
depended on by everyone, and he wished he
had the wizard at hand. But that was no use:
probably all the dark distance of Mirkwood lay
between them. He sat and thought and thought,
until his head nearly burst, but no bright idea
would come. One invisible ring was a very fine
thing, but it was not much good among fourteen.
But of course, as you have guessed, he did
rescue his friends in the end, and this is how it
happened.

One day, nosing and wandering about,
Bilbo discovered a very interesting thing: the
great gates were not the only entrance to the
caves. A stream flowed under part of the lowest
regions of the palace, and joined the Forest
River some way further to the east, beyond the
steep slope out of which the main mouth
opened. Where this underground watercourse
came forth from the hillside there was a water-
gate. There the rocky roof came down close to
the surface of the stream, and from it a
portcullis could be dropped right to the bed of
the river to prevent anyone coming in or out that
way. But the portcullis was often open, for a
good deal of traffic went out and in by the water-
gate. If anyone had come in that way, he would
have found himself in a dark rough tunnel
leading deep into the heart of the hill; but at one
point where it passed under the caves the roof

had been cut away and covered with great
oaken trapdoors. These opened upwards into
the king’s cellars. There stood barrels, and
barrels, and barrels; for the Wood-elves, and
especially their king, were very fond of wine,
though no vines grew in those parts. The wine,
and other goods, were brought from far away,
from their kinsfolk in the South, or from the
vineyards of Men in distant lands.

Hiding behind one of the largest barrels
Bilbo discovered the trapdoors and their use,
and lurking there, listening to the talk of the
king's servants, he learned how the wine and
other goods came up the rivers, or over land, to
the Long Lake. It seemed a town of Men still
throve there, built out on bridges far into the
water as a protection against enemies of all
sorts, and especially against the dragon of the
Mountain. From Lake-town the barrels were
brought up the Forest River. Often they were
just tied together like big rafts and poled or
rowed up the stream; sometimes they were
loaded on to flat boats.

When the barrels were empty the elves cast
them through the trapdoors, opened the water-
gate, and out the barrels floated on the stream,
bobbing along, until they were carried by the
current to a place far down the river where the
bank jutted out, near to the very eastern edge of
Mirkwood. There they were collected and tied
together and floated back to Lake-town, which

stood close to the point where the Forest River
flowed into the Long Lake.

For some time Bilbo sat and thought about this
water-gate, and wondered if it could be used for
the escape of his friends, and at last he had the
desperate beginnings of a plan.

The evening meal had been taken to the
prisoners. The guards were tramping away
down the passages taking the torchlight with
them and leaving everything in darkness. Then
Bilbo heard the king's butler bidding the chief of
the guards good-night.

“Now come with me,” he said, “and taste
the new wine that has just come in. I shall be
hard at work tonight clearing the cellars of the
empty wood, so let us have a drink first to help
the labour.”

“Very good,” laughed the chief of the
guards. “I’ll taste with you, and see if it is fit for
the king’s table. There is a feast tonight and it
would not do to send up poor stuff!”

When he heard this Bilbo was all in a flutter, for
he saw that luck was with him and he had a
chance at once to try his desperate plan. Fie
followed the two elves, until they entered a small
cellar and sat down at a table on which two

large flagons were set. Soon they began to
drink and laugh merrily. Luck of an unusual kind
was with Bilbo then. It must be potent wine to
make a wood-elf drowsy; but this wine, it would
seem, was the heady vintage of the great
gardens of Dorwinion, not meant for his
soldiers or his servants, but for the king's feasts
only, and for smaller bowls not for the butler’s
great flagons.

Very soon the chief guard nodded his head,
then he laid it on the table and fell fast asleep.
The butler went on talking and laughing to
himself for a while without seeming to notice,
but soon his head too nodded to the table, and
he fell asleep and snored beside his friend.
Then in crept the hobbit. Very soon the chief
guard had no keys, but Bilbo was trotting as
fast as he could along the passages towards
the cells. The great bunch seemed very heavy
to his arms, and his heart was often in his
mouth, in spite of his ring, for he could not
prevent the keys from making every now and
then a loud clink and clank, which put him all in
a tremble.

First he unlocked Balin’s door, and locked it
again carefully as soon as the dwarf was
outside. Balin was most surprised, as you can
imagine; but glad as he was to get out of his
wearisome little stone room, he wanted to stop
and ask questions, and know what Bilbo was
going to do, and all about it.

“No time now!” said the hobbit. “You just
follow me! We must all keep together and not
risk getting separated. All of us must escape or
none, and this is our last chance. If this is found
out, goodness knows where the king will put you
next, with chains on your hands and feet too, I
expect. Don't argue, there’s a good fellow!”

Then off he went from door to door, until his
following had grown to twelve — none of them
any too nimble, what with the dark, and what
with their long imprisonment. Bilbo’s heart
thumped every time one of them bumped into
another, or grunted or whispered in the dark.
“Drat this dwarvish racket!” he said to himself.
But all went well, and they met no guards. As a
matter of fact there was a great autumn feast in
the woods that night, and in the halls above.
Nearly all the king’s folk were merrymaking.

At last after much blundering they came to
Thorin’s dungeon, far down in a deep place and
fortunately not far from the cellars.

“Upon my word!” said Thorin, when Bilbo
whispered to him to come out and join his
friends, “Gandalf spoke true, as usual! A pretty
fine burglar you make, it seems, when the time
comes. I am sure we are all for ever at your
service, whatever happens after this. But what
comes next?”

Bilbo saw that the time had come to explain
his idea, as far as he could; but he did not feel
at all sure how the dwarves would take it. His

fears were quite justified, for they did not like it
a bit, and started grumbling loudly in spite of
their danger.

“We shall be bruised and battered to
pieces, and drowned too, for certain!” they
muttered. “We thought you had got some
sensible notion, when you managed to get hold
of the keys. This is a mad idea!”

“Very well!” said Bilbo very downcast, and
also rather annoyed. “Come along back to your
nice cells, and I will lock you all in again, and
you can sit there comfortably and think of a
better plan — but I don't suppose I shall ever get
hold of the keys again, even if I feel inclined to
try.”

That was too much for them, and they
calmed down. In the end, of course, they had to
do just what Bilbo suggested, because it was
obviously impossible for them to try and find
their way into the upper halls, or to fight their
way out of gates that closed by magic; and it
was no good grumbling in the passages until
they were caught again. So following the hobbit,
down into the lowest cellars they crept. They
passed a door through which the chief guard
and the butler could be seen still happily snoring
with smiles upon their faces. The wine of
Dorwinion brings deep and pleasant dreams.
There would be a different expression on the
face of the chief guard next day, even though
Bilbo, before they went on, stole in and kind-

heartedly put the keys back on his belt.

“That will save him some of the trouble he is
in for,” said Mr. Baggins to himself. “He wasn’t
a bad fellow, and quite decent to the prisoners.
It will puzzle them all too. They will think we had
a very strong magic to pass through all those
locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We
have got to get busy very quick, if that is to
happen!”

Balin was told off to watch the guard and the
butler and give warning if they stirred. The rest
went into the adjoining cellar with the trapdoors.
There was little time to lose. Before long, as
Bilbo knew, some elves were under orders to
come down and help the butler get the empty
barrels through the doors into the stream.
These were in fact already standing in rows in
the middle of the floor waiting to be pushed off.
Some of them were wine-barrels, and these
were not much use, as they could not easily be
opened at the end without a deal of noise, nor
could they easily be secured again. But among
them were several others, which had been used
for bringing other stuffs, butter, apples, and all
sorts of things, to the king’s palace.

They soon found thirteen with room enough
for a dwarf in each. In fact some were too
roomy, and as they climbed in the dwarves

thought anxiously of the shaking and the
bumping they would get inside, though Bilbo did
his best to find straw and other stuff to pack
them in as cosily as could be managed in a
short time. At last twelve dwarves were stowed.
Thorin had given a lot of trouble, and turned and
twisted in his tub and grumbled like a large dog
in a small kennel; while Balin, who came last,
made a great fuss about his air-holes and said
he was stifling, even before his lid was on. Bilbo
had done what he could to close holes in the
sides of the barrels, and to fix on all the lids as
safely as could be managed, and now he was
left alone again, running round putting the
finishing touches to the packing, and hoping
against hope that his plan would come off.

It had not been done a bit too soon. Only a
minute or two after Balin's lid had been fitted on
there came the sound of voices and the flicker
of lights. A number of elves came laughing and
talking into the cellars and singing snatches of
song. They had left a merry feast in one of the
halls and were bent on returning as soon as
they could.

“Where’s old Galion, the butler?” said one.
“I haven’t seen him at the tables tonight. He
ought to be here now to show us what is to be
done.”

“I shall be angry if the old slowcoach is late,”
said another. “I have no wish to waste time
down here while the song is up!”

"Ha, ha!” came a cry. “Here's the old villain
with his head on a jug! He's been having a little
feast all to himself and his friend the captain.”

“Shake him! Wake him!” shouted the others
impatiently.

Galion was not at all pleased at being
shaken or wakened, and still less at being
laughed at. “You’re all late,” he grumbled. “Here
am I waiting and waiting down here, while you
fellows drink and make merry and forget your
tasks. Small wonder if I fall asleep from
weariness!”

“Small wonder,” said they, “when the
explanation stands close at hand in a jug!
Come give us a taste of your sleeping-draught
before we fall to! No need to wake the turnkey
yonder. He has had his share by the looks of it.”

Then they drank once round and became
mighty merry all of a sudden. But they did not
quite lose their wits. “Save us, Galion!” cried
some, “you began your feasting early and
muddled your wits! You have stacked some full
casks here instead of the empty ones, if there is
anything in weight.”

“Get on with the work!” growled the butler.
“There is nothing in the feeling of weight in an
idle toss-pot's arms. These are the ones to go
and no others. Do as I say!”

“Very well, very well,” they answered rolling
the barrels to the opening. “On your head be it,
if the king’s full buttertubs and his best wine is

pushed into the river for the Lake-men to feast
on for nothing!”

Roll — roll — roll — roll,
roll -roll -rolling down the hole!
Heave ho! Splash plump!

Down they go, down they bump!

So they sang as first one barrel and then
another rumbled to the dark opening and was
pushed over into the cold water some feet
below. Some were barrels really empty, some
were tubs neatly packed with a dwarf each; but
down they all went, one after another, with many
a clash and a bump, thudding on top of ones
below, smacking into the water, jostling against
the walls of the tunnel, knocking into one
another, and bobbing away down the current.

It was just at this moment that Bilbo
suddenly discovered the weak point in his plan.
Most likely you saw it some time ago and have
been laughing at him; but I don’t suppose you
would have done half as well yourselves in his
place. Of course he was not in a barrel himself,
nor was there anyone to pack him in, even if
there had been a chance! It looked as if he
would certainly lose his friends this time (nearly
all of them had already disappeared through the
dark trap-door), and get utterly left behind and

have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar in
the elf-caves for ever. For even if he could have
escaped through the upper gates at once, he
had precious small chance of ever finding the
dwarves again. He did not know the way by
land to the place where the barrels were
collected. He wondered what on earth would
happen to them without him; for he had not had
time to tell the dwarves all that he had learned,
or what he had meant to do, once they were out
of the wood.

While all these thoughts were passing
through his mind, the elves being very merry
began to sing a song round the river-door.
Some had already gone to haul on the ropes
which pulled up the portcullis at the water-gate
so as to let out the barrels as soon as they were
all afloat below.

Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know/.
Leave the halls and caverns deep,
Leave the northern mountains steep,
Where the forest wide and dim
Stoops in shadow grey and grim!
Float beyond the world of trees
Out into the whispering breeze,

Past the rushes, past the reeds,

Past the marsh’s waving weeds,
Through the mist that riseth white

Up from mere and pool at night!
Follovy follow stars that leap
Up the heavens cold and steep;
Turn when dawn comes overland,
Over rapid, over sand,

South away! and South away!
Seek the sunlight and the day,
Back to pasture, back to mead,
Where the kine and oxen feed!
Back to gardens on the hills
Where the berry swells and fills
Under sunlight, under day!

South away! and South away!
Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know/.

Now the very last barrel was being rolled to
the doors! In despair and not knowing what else
to do, poor little Bilbo caught hold of it and was
pushed over the edge with it. Down into the
water he fell, splash! into the cold dark water
with the barrel on top of him.

He came up again spluttering and clinging
to the wood like a rat, but for all his efforts he
could not scramble on top. Every time he tried,
the barrel rolled round and ducked him under
again. It was really empty, and floated light as a
cork. Though his ears were full of water, he
could hear the elves still singing in the cellar
above. Then suddenly the trap-doors fell to with

a boom and their voices faded away. He was in
the dark tunnel floating in icy water, all alone —
for you cannot count friends that are all packed
up in barrels.

Very soon a grey patch came in the
darkness ahead. He heard the creak of the
water-gate being hauled up, and he found that
he was in the midst of a bobbing and bumping
mass of casks and tubs all pressing together to
pass under the arch and get out into the open
stream. He had as much as he could do to
prevent himself from being hustled and battered
to bits; but at last the jostling crowd began to
break up and swing off, one by one, under the
stony arch and away Then he saw that it would
have been no good even if he had managed to
get astride his barrel, for there was no room to
spare, not even for a hobbit, between its top
and the suddenly stooping roof where the gate
was.

Out they went under the overhanging branches
of the trees on either bank. Bilbo wondered
what the dwarves were feeling and whether a lot
of water was getting into their tubs. Some of
those that bobbed along by him in the gloom
seemed pretty low in the water, and he guessed
that these had dwarves inside.

“I do hope I put the lids on tight enough!” he

thought, but before long he was worrying too
much about himself to remember the dwarves.
He managed to keep his head above the water,
but he was shivering with the cold, and he
wondered if he would die of it before the luck
turned, and how much longer he would be able
to hang on, and whether he should risk the
chance of letting go and trying to swim to the
bank.

The luck turned all right before long: the
eddying current carried several barrels close
ashore at one point and there for a while they
stuck against some hidden root. Then Bilbo
took the opportunity of scrambling up the side
of his barrel while it was held steady against
another. Up he crawled like a drowned rat, and
lay on the top spread out to keep the balance
as best he could. The breeze was cold but
better than the water, and he hoped he would
not suddenly roll off again when they started off
once more.

Before long the barrels broke free again
and turned and twisted off down the stream,
and out into the main current. Then he found it
quite as difficult to stick on as he had feared;
but he managed it somehow, though it was
miserably uncomfortable. Luckily he was very
light, and the barrel was a good big one and
being rather leaky had now shipped a small
amount of water. All the same it was like trying
to ride, without bridle or stirrups, a round-bellied

pony that was always thinking of rolling on the
grass.

In this way at last Mr. Baggins came to a
place where the trees on either hand grew
thinner. He could see the paler sky between
them. The dark river opened suddenly wide,
and there it was joined to the main water of the
Forest River flowing down in haste from the
king's great doors. There was a dim sheet of
water no longer overshadowed, and on its
sliding surface there were dancing and broken
reflections of clouds and of stars. Then the
hurrying water of the Forest River swept all the
company of casks and tubs away to the north
bank, in which it had eaten out a wide bay. This
had a shingly shore under hanging banks and
was walled at the eastern end by a little jutting
cape of hard rock. On the shallow shore most of
the barrels ran aground, though a few went on
to bump against the stony pier.

There were people on the look-out on the
banks. They quickly poled and pushed all the
barrels together into the shallows, and when
they had counted them they roped them
together and left them till the morning. Poor
dwarves! Bilbo was not badly off now. He
slipped from his barrel and waded ashore, and
then sneaked along to some huts that he could
see near the water’s edge. He no longer
thought twice about picking up a supper
uninvited if he got the chance, he had been

obliged to do it for so long, and he knew now
only too well what it was to be really hungry, not
merely politely interested in the dainties of a
well-filled larder. Also he had caught a glimpse
of a fire through the trees, and that appealed to
him with his dripping and ragged clothes
clinging to him cold and clammy.

There is no need to tell you much of his
adventures that night, for now we are drawing
near the end of the eastward journey and
coming to the last and greatest adventure, so
we must hurry on. Of course helped by his
magic ring he got on very well at first, but he
was given away in the end by his wet footsteps
and the trail of drippings that he left wherever he
went or sat; and also he began to snivel, and
wherever he tried to hide he was found out by
the terrific explosions of his suppressed
sneezes. Very soon there was a fine
commotion in the village by the riverside; but
Bilbo escaped into the woods carrying a loaf
and a leather bottle of wine and a pie that did
not belong to him. The rest of the night he had
to pass wet as he was and far from a fire, but
the bottle helped him to do that, and he actually
dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though
the yearwas getting late and the airwas chilly.

He woke again with a specially loud

sneeze. It was already grey morning, and there
was a merry racket down by the river. They
were making up a raft of barrels, and the raft-
elves would soon be steering it off down the
stream to Lake-town. Bilbo sneezed again. He
was no longer dripping but he felt cold all over.
He scrambled down as fast as his stiff legs
would take him and managed just in time to get
on to the mass of casks without being noticed
in the general bustle. Luckily there was no sun
at the time to cast an awkward shadow, and for
a mercy he did not sneeze again for a good
while.

There was a mighty pushing of poles. The
elves that were standing in the shallow water
heaved and shoved. The barrels now all lashed
together creaked and fretted.

“This is a heavy load!” some grumbled.
“They float too deep — some of these are never
empty. If they had come ashore in the daylight,
we might have had a look inside,” they said.

“No time now!” cried the raftman. “Shove
off!” And off they went at last, slowly at first, until
they had passed the point of rock where other
elves stood to fend them off with poles, and
then quicker and quicker as they caught the
main stream and went sailing away down, down
towards the Lake.

They had escaped the dungeons of the king
and were through the wood, but whether alive or
dead still remains to be seen.

Chapter X

A WARM WELCOME

The day grew lighter and warmer as they
floated along. After a while the river rounded a
steep shoulder of land that came down upon
their left. Under its rocky feet like an inland cliff
the deepest stream had flowed lapping and
bubbling. Suddenly the cliff fell away. The
shores sank. The trees ended. Then Bilbo saw
a sight:

The lands opened wide about him, filled
with the waters of the river which broke up and
wandered in a hundred winding courses, or
halted in marshes and pools dotted with isles
on every side; but still a strong water flowed on
steadily through the midst. And far away, its
dark head in a torn cloud, there loomed the
Mountain! Its nearest neighbours to the North-
East and the tumbled land that joined it to them
could not be seen. All alone it rose and looked
across the marshes to the forest. The Lonely

Mountain! Bilbo had come far and through
many adventures to see it, and now he did not
like the look of it in the least.

As he listened to the talk of the raftmen and
pieced together the scraps of information they
let fall, he soon realized that he was very
fortunate ever to have seen it at all, even from
this distance. Dreary as had been his
imprisonment and unpleasant as was his
position (to say nothing of the poor dwarves
underneath him) still, he had been more lucky
than he had guessed. The talk was all of the
trade that came and went on the waterways and
the growth of the traffic on the river, as the
roads out of the East towards Mirkwood
vanished or fell into disuse; and of the
bickerings of the Lake-men and the Wood-
elves about the upkeep of the Forest River and
the care of the banks. Those lands had
changed much since the days when dwarves
dwelt in the Mountain, days which most people
now remembered only as a very shadowy
tradition. They had changed even in recent
years, and since the last news that Gandalf had
had of them. Great floods and rains had swollen
the waters that flowed east; and there had been
an earthquake or two (which some were
inclined to attribute to the dragon — alluding to
him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod in

the direction of the Mountain). The marshes and
bogs had spread wider and wider on either
side. Paths had vanished, and many a rider and
wanderer too, if they had tried to find the lost
ways across. The elf-road through the wood
which the dwarves had followed on the advice
of Beorn now came to a doubtful and little used
end at the eastern edge of the forest; only the
river offered any longer a safe way from the
skirts of Mirkwood in the North to the mountain-
shadowed plains beyond, and the river was
guarded by the Wood-elves’ king.

So you see Bilbo had come in the end by
the only road that was any good. It might have
been some comfort to Mr. Baggins shivering on
the barrels, if he had known that news of this
had reached Gandalf far away and given him
great anxiety, and that he was in fact finishing
his other business (which does not come into
this tale) and getting ready to come in search of
Thorin’s company. But Bilbo did not know it.

All he knew was that the river seemed to go
on and on and on for ever, and he was hungry,
and had a nasty cold in the nose, and did not
like the way the Mountain seemed to frown at
him and threaten him as it drew ever nearer.
After a while, however, the river took a more
southerly course and the Mountain receded
again, and at last, late in the day the shores

grew rocky, the river gathered all its wandering
waters together into a deep and rapid flood,
and they swept along at great speed.

The sun had set when turning with another
sweep towards the East the forest-river rushed
into the Long Lake. There it had a wide mouth
with stony clifflike gates at either side whose
feet were piled with shingles. The Long Lake!
Bilbo had never imagined that any water that
was not the sea could look so big. It was so
wide that the opposite shores looked small and
far, but it was so long that its northerly end,
which pointed towards the Mountain, could not
be seen at all. Only from the map did Bilbo
know that away up there, where the stars of the
Wain were already twinkling, the Running River
came down into the lake from Dale and with the
Forest River filled with deep waters what must
once have been a great deep rocky valley. At
the southern end the doubled waters poured out
again over high waterfalls and ran away
hurriedly to unknown lands. In the still evening
air the noise of the falls could be heard like a
distant roar.

Not far from the mouth of the Forest River
was the strange town he heard the elves speak
of in the king’s cellars. It was not built on the
shore, though there were a few huts and
buildings there, but right out on the surface of

the lake, protected from the swirl of the entering
river by a promontory of rock which formed a
calm bay. A great bridge made of wood ran out
to where on huge piles made of forest trees
was built a busy wooden town, not a town of
elves but of Men, who still dared to dwell here
under the shadow of the distant dragon-
mountain. They still throve on the trade that
came up the great river from the South and was
carted past the falls to their town; but in the
great days of old, when Dale in the North was
rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and
powerful, and there had been fleets of boats on
the waters, and some were filled with gold and
some with warriors in armour, and there had
been wars and deeds which were now only a
legend. The rotting piles of a greater town could
still be seen along the shores when the waters
sank in a drought.

But men remembered little of all that, though
some still sang old songs of the dwarf-kings of
the Mountain, Thror and Thrain of the race of
Durin, and of the coming of the Dragon, and the
fall of the lords of Dale. Some sang too that
Thror and Thrain would come back one day and
gold would flow in rivers, through the mountain-
gates, and all that land would be filled with new
song and new laughter. But this pleasant legend
did not much affect their daily business.

As soon as the raft of barrels came in sight
boats rowed out from the piles of the town, and
voices hailed the raft-steerers. Then ropes were
cast and oars were pulled, and soon the raft
was drawn out of the current of the Forest River
and towed away round the high shoulder of rock
into the little bay of Lake-town. There it was
moored not far from the shoreward head of the
great bridge. Soon men would come up from
the South and take some of the casks away,
and others they would fill with goods they had
brought to be taken back up the stream to the
Wood-elves’ home. In the meanwhile the
barrels were left afloat while the elves of the raft
and the boatmen went to feast in Lake-town.

They would have been surprised, if they
could have seen what happened down by the
shore, after they had gone and the shades of
night had fallen. First of all a barrel was cut
loose by Bilbo and pushed to the shore and
opened. Groans came from inside, and out
crept a most unhappy dwarf. Wet straw was in
his draggled beard; he was so sore and stiff, so
bruised and buffeted he could hardly stand or

stumble through the shallow water to lie
groaning on the shore. He had a famished and
a savage look like a dog that has been chained
and forgotten in a kennel for a week. It was
Thorin, but you could only have told it by his
golden chain, and by the colour of his now dirty
and tattered sky-blue hood with its tarnished
silver tassel. It was some time before he would
be even polite to the hobbit.

“Well, are you alive or are you dead?”
asked Bilbo quite crossly. Perhaps he had
forgotten that he had had at least one good
meal more than the dwarves, and also the use
of his arms and legs, not to speak of a greater
allowance of air. “Are you still in prison, or are
you free? If you want food, and if you want to go
on with this silly adventure — it’s yours after all
and not mine — you had better slap your arms
and rub your legs and try and help me get the
others out while there is a chance!”

Thorin of course saw the sense of this, so
after a few more groans he got up and helped
the hobbit as well as he could. In the darkness
floundering in the cold water they had a difficult
and very nasty job finding which were the right
barrels. Knocking outside and calling only
discovered about six dwarves that could
answer. These were unpacked and helped
ashore where they sat or lay muttering and

moaning; they were so soaked and bruised and
cramped that they could hardly yet realize their
release or be properly thankful for it.

Dwalin and Balin were two of the most
unhappy, and it was no good asking them to
help. Bifur and Bofur were less knocked about
and drier, but they lay down and would do
nothing. Fili and Kili, however, who were young
(for dwarves) and had also been packed more
neatly with plenty of straw into smaller casks,
came out more or less smiling, with only a
bruise or two and a stiffness that soon wore off.

“I hope I never smell the smell of apples
again!” said Fili. “My tub was full of it. To smell
apples everlastingly when you can scarcely
move and are cold and sick with hunger is
maddening. I could eat anything in the wide
world now, for hours on end — but not an apple!”

With the willing help of Fili and Kili, Thorin
and Bilbo at last discovered the remainder of
the company and got them out. Poor fat
Bombur was asleep or senseless; Dori, Nori,
Ori, Oin and Gloin were waterlogged and
seemed only half alive; they all had to be
carried one by one and laid helpless on the
shore.

“Well! Here we are!” said Thorin. “And I
suppose we ought to thank our stars and Mr.
Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it,

though I wish he could have arranged a more
comfortable journey. Still — all very much at your
service once more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we
shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and
recovered. In the meanwhile what next?”

“I suggest Lake-town,” said Bilbo. “What
else is there?”

Nothing else could, of course, be
suggested; so leaving the others Thorin and Fili
and Kili and the hobbit went along the shore to
the great bridge. There were guards at the
head of it, but they were not keeping very
careful watch, for it was so long since there had
been any real need. Except for occasional
squabbles about river-tolls they were friends
with the Wood-elves. Other folk were far away;
and some of the younger people in the town
openly doubted the existence of any dragon in
the mountain, and laughed at the greybeards
and gammers who said that they had seen him
flying in the sky in their young days. That being
so it is not surprising that the guards were
drinking and laughing by a fire in their hut, and
did not hear the noise of the unpacking of the
dwarves or the footsteps of the four scouts.
Their astonishment was enormous when Thorin
Oakenshield stepped in through the door.

“Who are you and what do you want?” they
shouted leaping to their feet and groping for

weapons.

“Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King
under the Mountain!” said the dwarf in a loud
voice, and he looked it, in spite of his torn
clothes and draggled hood. The gold gleamed
on his neck and waist; his eyes were dark and
deep. “I have come back. I wish to see the
Master of your town! ”

Then there was tremendous excitement.
Some of the more foolish ran out of the hut as if
they expected the Mountain to go golden in the
night and all the waters of the lake turn yellow
right away. The captain of the guard came
forward.

“And who are these?” he asked, pointing to
Fili and Kili and Bilbo.

“The sons of my father’s daughter,”
answered Thorin, “Fili and Kili of the race of
Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled with
us out of the West.”

“If you come in peace lay down your arms!”
said the captain.

“We have none,” said Thorin, and it was
true enough: their knives had been taken from
them by the wood-elves, and the great sword
Orcrist too. Bilbo had his short sword, hidden
as usual, but he said nothing about that. “We
have no need of weapons, who return at last to
our own as spoken of old. Nor could we fight

against so many. Take us to your master!”

“He is at feast,” said the captain.

“Then all the more reason for taking us to
him,” burst in Fili, who was getting impatient at
these solemnities. “We are worn and famished
after our long road and we have sick comrades.
Now make haste and let us have no more
words, or your master may have something to
say to you.”

“Follow me then,” said the captain, and with
six men about them he led them over the bridge
through the gates and into the market-place of
the town. This was a wide circle of quiet water
surrounded by the tall piles on which were built
the greater houses, and by long wooden quays
with many steps and ladders going down to the
surface of the lake. From one great hall shone
many lights and there came the sound of many
voices. They passed its doors and stood
blinking in the light looking at long tables filled
with folk.

“I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King
under the Mountain! I return!” cried Thorin in a
loud voice from the door, before the captain
could say anything.

All leaped to their feet. The Master of the
town sprang from his great chair. But none rose
in greater surprise than the raft-men of the elves
who were sitting at the lower end of the hall.

Pressing forward before the Master’s table they
cried:

“These are prisoners of our king that have
escaped, wandering vagabond dwarves that
could not give any good account of themselves,
sneaking through the woods and molesting our
people!”

“Is this true?” asked the Master. As a matter
of fact he thought it far more likely than the
return of the King under the Mountain, if any
such person had ever existed.

“It is true that we were wrongfully waylaid by
the Elvenking and imprisoned without cause as
we journeyed back to our own land,” answered
Thorin. “But lock nor bar may hinder the
homecoming spoken of old. Nor is this town in
the Wood-elves’ realm. I speak to the Master of
the town of the Men of the Lake, not to the raft-
men of the king.”

Then the Master hesitated and looked from
one to the other. The Elvenking was very
powerful in those parts and the Master wished
for no enmity with him, nor did he think much of
old songs, giving his mind to trade and tolls, to
cargoes and gold, to which habit he owed his
position. Others were of different mind,
however, and quickly the matter was settled
without him. The news had spread from the
doors of the hall like fire through all the town.

People were shouting inside the hall and
outside it. The quays were thronged with
hurrying feet. Some began to sing snatches of
old songs concerning the return of the King
under the Mountain; that it was Thror’s
grandson not Thror himself that had come back
did not bother them at all. Others took up the
song and it rolled loud and high over the lake.

The King beneath the mountains,
The King of caive n stone,

The lord of silver fountains
Shall come into his ov\n!

His crown shall be upholden,
His harp shall be restrung,
His halls shall echo golden
To songs of yore re-sung.

The mods shall wave on mountains
And grass beneath the sun;

His wealth shall flowin fountains
And the rivers golden run.

The streams shall run in gladness,
The lakes shall shine and burn,
All sorrowfail and sadness
At the Mountain-king’s return!

So they sang, or very like that, only there
was a great deal more of it, and there was
much shouting as well as the music of harps
and of fiddles mixed up with it. Indeed such
excitement had not been known in the town in
the memory of the oldest grandfather. The
Wood-elves themselves began to wonder
greatly and even to be afraid. They did not know
of course how Thorin had escaped, and they
began to think their king might have made a
serious mistake. As for the Master he saw there
was nothing else for it but to obey the general
clamour, for the moment at any rate, and to
pretend to believe that Thorin was what he said.
So he gave up to him his own great chair and
set Fili and Kili beside him in places of honour.
Even Bilbo was given a seat at the high table,
and no explanation of where he came in — no
songs had alluded to him even in the obscurest
way — was asked for in the general bustle.

Soon afterwards the other dwarves were
brought into the town amid scenes of

astonishing enthusiasm. They were all doctored
and fed and housed and pampered in the most
delightful and satisfactory fashion. A large
house was given up to Thorin and his company;
boats and rowers were put at their service; and
crowds sat outside and sang songs all day, or
cheered if any dwarf showed so much as his
nose.

Some of the songs were old ones; but
some of them were quite new and spoke
confidently of the sudden death of the dragon
and of cargoes of rich presents coming down
the river to Lake-town. These were inspired
largely by the Master and they did not
particularly please the dwarves, but in the
meantime they were well contented and they
quickly grew fat and strong again. Indeed within
a week they were quite recovered, fitted out in
fine cloth of their proper colours, with beards
combed and trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin
looked and walked as if his kingdom was
already regained and Smaug chopped up into
little pieces.

Then, as he had said, the dwarves’ good
feeling towards the little hobbit grew stronger
every day. There were no more groans or
grumbles. They drank his health, and they
patted him on the back, and they made a great
fuss of him; which was just as well, for he was

not feeling particularly cheerful. He had not
forgotten the look of the Mountain, nor the
thought of the dragon, and he had besides a
shocking cold. For three days he sneezed and
coughed, and he could not go out, and even
after that his speeches at banquets were
limited to “Thag you very buch.”

In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone
back up the Forest River with their cargoes,
and there was great excitement in the king’s
palace. I have never heard what happened to
the chief of the guards and the butler. Nothing of
course was ever said about keys or barrels
while the dwarves stayed in Lake-town, and
Bilbo was careful never to become invisible.
Still, I daresay, more was guessed than was
known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins remained
a bit of a mystery. In any case the king knew
now the dwarves’ errand, or thought he did, and
he said to himself:

“Very well! We’ll see! No treasure will come
back through Mirkwood without my having
something to say in the matter. But I expect they
will all come to a bad end, and serve them
right!” He at any rate did not believe in dwarves
fighting and killing dragons like Smaug, and he

strongly suspected attempted burglary or
something like it — which shows he was a wise
elf and wiser than the men of the town, though
not quite right, as we shall see in the end. He
sent out his spies about the shores of the lake
and as far northward towards the Mountain as
they would go, and waited.

At the end of a fortnight Thorin began to
think of departure. While the enthusiasm still
lasted in the town was the time to get help. It
would not do to let everything cool down with
delay. So he spoke to the Master and his

councillors and said that soon he and his

company must go on towards the Mountain.

Then for the first time the Master was
surprised and a little frightened; and he

wondered if Thorin was after all really a

descendant of the old kings. He had never
thought that the dwarves would actually dare to
approach Smaug, but believed they were
frauds who would sooner or later be discovered
and be turned out. He was wrong. Thorin, of
course, was really the grandson of the King
under the Mountain, and there is no knowing
what a dwarf will not dare and do for revenge or
the recovery of his own.

But the Master was not sorry at all to let
them go. They were expensive to keep, and
their arrival had turned things into a long holiday

in which business was at a standstill. “Let them
go and bother Smaug, and see how he
welcomes them!” he thought. “Certainly, O
Thorin Thrain’s son Thror’s son!” was what he
said. “You must claim your own. The hour is at
hand, spoken of old. What help we can offer
shall be yours, and we trust to your gratitude
when your kingdom is regained.”

So one day, although autumn was now
getting far on, and winds were cold, and leaves
were falling fast, three large boats left Lake-
town, laden with rowers, dwarves, Mr. Baggins,
and many provisions. Horses and ponies had
been sent round by circuitous paths to meet
them at their appointed landing-place. The
Master and his councillors bade them farewell
from the great steps of the town-hall that went
down to the lake. People sang on the quays
and out of windows. The white oars dipped and
splashed, and off they went north up the lake on
the last stage of their long journey. The only
person thoroughly unhappy was Bilbo.

Chapter XI

ON THE DOORSTEP

In two days going they rowed right up the Long
Lake and passed out into the River Running,
and now they could all see the Lonely Mountain
towering grim and tall before them. The stream
was strong and their going slow. At the end of
the third day, some miles up the river, they drew
in to the left or western bank and disembarked.
Here they were joined by the horses with other
provisions and necessaries and the ponies for
their own use that had been sent to meet them.
They packed what they could on the ponies and
the rest was made into a store under a tent, but
none of the men of the town would stay with
them even for the night so near the shadow of
the Mountain.

“Not at any rate until the songs have come
true!” said they. It was easier to believe in the
Dragon and less easy to believe in Thorin in
these wild parts. Indeed their stores had no
need of any guard, for all the land was desolate
and empty. So their escort left them, making off
swiftly down the river and the shoreward paths,
although the night was already drawing on.

They spent a cold and lonely night and their
spirits fell. The next day they set out again. Balin
and Bilbo rode behind, each leading another
pony heavily laden beside him; the others were
some way ahead picking out a slow road, for

there were no paths. They made north-west,
slanting away from the River Running, and
drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur
of the Mountain that was flung out southwards
towards them.

It was a weary journey, and a quiet and
stealthy one. There was no laughter or song or
sound of harps, and the pride and hopes which
had stirred in their hearts at the singing of old
songs by the lake died away to a plodding
gloom. They knew that they were drawing near
to the end of their journey, and that it might be a
very horrible end. The land about them grew
bleak and barren, though once, as Thorin told
them, it had been green and fair. There was
little grass, and before long there was neither
bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened
stumps to speak of ones long vanished. They
were come to the Desolation of the Dragon,
and they were come at the waning of the year.

They reached the skirts of the Mountain all the
same without meeting any danger or any sign of
the Dragon other than the wilderness he had
made about his lair. The Mountain lay dark and
silent before them and ever higher above them.
They made their first camp on the western side
of the great southern spur, which ended in a
height called Ravenhill. On this there had been
an old watch-post; but they dared not climb it
yet, it was too exposed.

Before setting out to search the western
spurs of the Mountain for the hidden door, on
which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a
scouting expedition to spy out the land to the
South where the Front Gate stood. For this

purpose he chose Balin and Fili and Kili, and
with them went Bilbo. They marched under the
grey and silent cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill.
There the river, after winding a wide loop over
the valley of Dale, turned from the Mountain on
its road to the Lake, flowing swift and noisily. Its
bank was bare and rocky, tall and steep above
the stream; and gazing out from it over the
narrow water, foaming and splashing among
many boulders, they could see in the wide valley
shadowed by the Mountain’s arms the grey
ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls.

“There lies all that is left of Dale,” said Balin.
“The mountain’s sides were green with woods
and all the sheltered valley rich and pleasant in
the days when the bells rang in that town.” He
looked both sad and grim as he said this: he
had been one of Thorin’s companions on the
day the Dragon came.

They did not dare to follow the river much
further towards the Gate; but they went on
beyond the end of the southern spur, until lying
hidden behind a rock they could look out and
see the dark cavernous opening in a great cliff-
wall between the arms of the Mountain. Out of it
the waters of the Running River sprang; and out
of it too there came a steam and a dark smoke.
Nothing moved in the waste, save the vapour
and the water, and every now and again a black
and ominous crow. The only sound was the
sound of the stony water, and every now and
again the harsh croak of a bird. Balin
shuddered.

“Let us return!” he said. “We can do no
good here! And I don’t like these dark birds,
they look like spies of evil.”

The Front Gate.

“The dragon is still alive and in the halls
under the Mountain then — or I imagine so from
the smoke," said the hobbit.

“That does not prove it,” said Balin, “though
I don’t doubt you are right. But he might be gone
away some time, or he might be lying out on the
mountain-side keeping watch, and still I expect
smokes and steams would come out of the
gates: all the halls within must be filled with his
foul reek.”

With such gloomy thoughts, followed ever by
croaking crows above them, they made their
weary way back to the camp. Only in June they
had been guests in the fair house of Elrond, and
though autumn was now crawling towards
winter that pleasant time now seemed years
ago. They were alone in the perilous waste
without hope of further help. They were at the
end of their journey, but as far as ever, it
seemed, from the end of their quest. None of
them had much spirit left.

Now strange to say Mr. Baggins had more
than the others. He would often borrow Thorin's
map and gaze at it, pondering over the runes
and the message of the moon-letters Elrond
had read. It was he that made the dwarves
begin the dangerous search on the western
slopes for the secret door. They moved their
camp then to a long valley, narrower than the
great dale in the South where the Gates of the
river stood, and walled with lower spurs of the
Mountain. Two of these here thrust forward west
from the main mass in long steep-sided ridges
that fell ever downwards towards the plain. On
this western side there were fewer signs of the
dragon’s marauding feet, and there was some
grass for their ponies. From this western camp,
shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the sun

began to sink towards the forest, day by day
they toiled in parties searching for paths up the
mountain-side, if the map was true, somewhere
high above the cliff at the valley’s head must
stand the secret door. Day by day they came
back to their camp without success.

But at last unexpectedly they found what
they were seeking. Fili and Kili and the hobbit
went back one day down the valley and
scrambled among the tumbled rocks at its
southern corner. About midday, creeping
behind a great stone that stood alone like a
pillar, Bilbo came on what looked like rough
steps going upwards. Following these excitedly
he and the dwarves found traces of a narrow
track, often lost, often rediscovered, that
wandered on to the top of the southern ridge
and brought them at last to a still narrower
ledge, which turned north across the face of the
Mountain. Looking down they saw that they
were at the top of the cliff at the valley’s head
and were gazing down on to their own camp
below. Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their
right, they went in single file along the ledge, till
the wall opened and they turned into a little
steep-walled bay, grassy-floored, still and quiet.
Its entrance which they had found could not be
seen from below because of the overhang of
the cliff, nor from further off because it was so
small that it looked like a dark crack and no
more. It was not a cave and was open to the sky
above; but at its inner end a flat wall rose up
that in the lower part, close to the ground, was
as smooth and upright as masons' work, but
without a joint or crevice to be seen. No sign
was there of post or lintel or threshold, nor any
sign of bar or bolt or key-hole; yet they did not
doubt that they had found the door at last.

They beat on it, they thrust and pushed at it,
they implored it to move, they spoke fragments
of broken spells of opening, and nothing stirred.
At last tired out they rested on the grass at its
feet, and then at evening began their long climb
down.

There was excitement in the camp that night. In
the morning they prepared to move once more.
Only Bofur and Bombur were left behind to
guard the ponies and such stores as they had
brought with them from the river. The others
went down the valley and up the newly found
path, and so to the narrow ledge. Along this
they could carry no bundles or packs, so narrow
and breathless was it, with a fall of a hundred
and fifty feet beside them on to sharp rocks
below; but each of them took a good coil of
rope wound tight about his waist, and so at last
without mishap they reached the little grassy
bay.

There they made their third camp, hauling
up what they needed from below with their
ropes. Down the same way they were able
occasionally to lower one of the more active
dwarves, such as Kili, to exchange such news
as there was, or to take a share in the guard
below, while Bofur was hauled up to the higher
camp. Bombur would not come up either the
rope or the path.

"I am too fat for such fly-walks,” he said. “I
should turn dizzy and tread on my beard, and
then you would be thirteen again. And the
knotted ropes are too slender for my weight.”
Luckily for him that was not true, as you will see.

In the meanwhile some of them explored the
ledge beyond the opening and found a path that
led higher and higher on to the mountain; but
they did not dare to venture very far that way,
nor was there much use in it. Out up there a
silence reigned, broken by no bird or sound
except that of the wind in the crannies of stone.
They spoke low and never called or sang, for
danger brooded in every rock. The others who
were busy with the secret of the door had no
more success. They were too eager to trouble
about the runes or the moon-letters, but tried
without resting to discover where exactly in the
smooth face of the rock the door was hidden.
They had brought picks and tools of many sorts
from Lake-town, and at first they tried to use
these. But when they struck the stone the
handles splintered and jarred their arms cruelly,
and the steel heads broke or bent like lead.
Mining work, they saw clearly, was no good
against the magic that had shut this door; and
they grew terrified, too, of the echoing noise.

Bilbo found sitting on the doorstep
lonesome and wearisome — there was not a
doorstep, of course, really, but they used to call
the little grassy space between the wall and the
opening the “doorstep” in fun, remembering
Bilbo's words long ago at the unexpected party
in his hobbit-hole, when he said they could sit
on the doorstep till they thought of something.
And sit and think they did, or wandered
aimlessly about, and glummer and glummer
they became.

Their spirits had risen a little at the
discovery of the path, but now they sank into
their boots; and yet they would not give it up and
go away. The hobbit was no longer much

brighter than the dwarves. He would do nothing
but sit with his back to the rock-face and stare
away west through the opening, over the cliff,
over the wide lands to the black wall of
Mirkwood, and to the distances beyond, in
which he sometimes thought he could catch
glimpses of the Misty Mountains small and far. If
the dwarves asked him what he was doing he
answered:

“You said sitting on the doorstep and
thinking would be my job, not to mention getting
inside, so I am sitting and thinking.” But I am
afraid he was not thinking much of the job, but
of what lay beyond the blue distance, the quiet
Western Land and the Hill and his hobbit-hole
under it.

A large grey stone lay in the centre of the
grass and he stared moodily at it or watched
the great snails. They seemed to love the little
shut-in bay with its walls of cool rock, and there
were many of them of huge size crawling slowly
and stickily along its sides.

“Tomorrow begins the last week of autumn,”
said Thorin one day.

“And winter comes after autumn,” said Bifur.

“And next year after that,” said Dwalin, “and
our beards will grow till they hang down the cliff
to the valley before anything happens here.
What is our burglar doing for us? Since he has
got an invisible ring, and ought to be a specially
excellent performer now, I am beginning to think
he might go through the Front Gate and spy
things out a bit!"

Bilbo heard this — the dwarves were on the
rocks just above the enclosure where he was

sitting — and “Good Gracious!” he thought, “so
that is what they are beginning to think, is it? It
is always poor me that has to get them out of
their difficulties, at least since the wizard left.
Whatever am I going to do? I might have known
that something dreadful would happen to me in
the end. I don’t think I could bear to see the
unhappy valley of Dale again, and as for that
steaming gate! I I”

That night he was very miserable and hardly
slept. Next day the dwarves all went wandering
off in various directions; some were exercising
the ponies down below, some were roving
about the mountain-side. All day Bilbo sat
gloomily in the grassy bay gazing at the stone,
or out west through the narrow opening. He had
a queer feeling that he was waiting for
something. “Perhaps the wizard will suddenly
come back today,” he thought.

If he lifted his head he could see a glimpse
of the distant forest. As the sun turned west
there was a gleam of yellow upon its far roof, as
if the light caught the last pale leaves. Soon he
saw the orange ball of the sun sinking towards
the level of his eyes. He went to the opening
and there pale and faint was a thin new moon
above the rim of Earth.

At that very moment he heard a sharp crack
behind him. There on the grey stone in the
grass was an enormous thrush, nearly coal
black, its pale yellow breast freckled with dark
spots. Crack! It had caught a snail and was
knocking it on the stone. Crack! Crack!

Suddenly Bilbo understood. Forgetting all
danger he stood on the ledge and hailed the
dwarves, shouting and waving. Those that were
nearest came tumbling over the rocks and as
fast as they could along the ledge to him,

wondering what on earth was the matter; the
others shouted to be hauled up the ropes
(except Bombur, of course: he was asleep).

Quickly Bilbo explained. They all fell silent:
the hobbit standing by the grey stone, and the
dwarves with wagging beards watching
impatiently. The sun sank lower and lower, and
their hopes fell. It sank into a belt of reddened
cloud and disappeared. The dwarves groaned,
but still Bilbo stood almost without moving. The
little moon was dipping to the horizon. Evening
was coming on. Then suddenly when their hope
was lowest a red ray of the sun escaped like a
finger through a rent in the cloud. A gleam of
light came straight through the opening into the
bay and fell on the smooth rock-face. The old
thrush, who had been watching from a high
perch with beady eyes and head cocked on
one side, gave a sudden trill. There was a loud
crack. A flake of rock split from the wall and fell.
A hole appeared suddenly about three feet from
the ground.

Quickly, trembling lest the chance should
fade, the dwarves rushed to the rock and
pushed — in vain.

“The key! The key!" cried Bilbo. “Where is
Thorin?"

Thorin hurried up.

“The key!" shouted Bilbo. “The key that went
with the map! Try it now while there is still time!”

Then Thorin stepped up and drew the key
on its chain from round his neck. He put it to the
hole. It fitted and it turned! Snap! The gleam
went out, the sun sank, the moon was gone, and
evening sprang into the sky.

Now they all pushed together, and slowly a
part of the rock-wall gave way. Long straight
cracks appeared and widened. A door five feet

high and three broad was outlined, and slowly
without a sound swung inwards. It seemed as if
darkness flowed out like a vapour from the hole
in the mountain-side, and deep darkness in
which nothing could be seen lay before their
eyes, a yawning mouth leading in and down.

Chapter XII

INSIDE INFORMATION

For a long time the dwarves stood in the dark
before the door and debated, until at last Thorin
spoke:

“Now is the time for our esteemed Mr.
Baggins, who has proved himself a good
companion on our long road, and a hobbit full of
courage and resource far exceeding his size,
and if I may say so possessed of good luck far
exceeding the usual allowance — now is the
time for him to perform the service for which he
was included in our Company; now is the time
for him to earn his Reward.”

You are familiar with Thorin’s style on
important occasions, so I will not give you any
more of it, though he went on a good deal
longer than this. It certainly was an important
occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient. By now he
was quite familiar with Thorin too, and he knew
what he was driving at.

“If you mean you think it is my job to go into
the secret passage first, O Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, may your beard grow ever
longer," he said crossly, “say so at once and
have done! I might refuse. I have got you out of
two messes already, which were hardly in the
original bargain, so that I am, I think, already
owed some reward. But ‘third time pays for all’
as my father used to say, and somehow I don’t
think I shall refuse. Perhaps I have begun to
trust my luck more than I used to in the old
days” — he meant last spring before he left his
own house, but it seemed centuries ago — “but
anyway I think I will go and have a peep at once
and get it over. Now who is coming with me?”

He did not expect a chorus of volunteers, so
he was not disappointed. Fili and Kili looked
uncomfortable and stood on one leg, but the
others made no pretence of offering — except
old Balin, the lookout man, who was rather fond
of the hobbit. He said he would come inside at
least and perhaps a bit of the way too, ready to
call for help if necessary.

The most that can be said for the dwarves
is this: they intended to pay Bilbo really
handsomely for his services; they had brought
him to do a nasty job for them, and they did not
mind the poor little fellow doing it if he would;
but they would all have done their best to get

him out of trouble, if he got into it, as they did in
the case of the trolls at the beginning of their
adventures before they had any particular
reasons for being grateful to him. There it is:
dwarves are not heroes, but calculating folk with
a great idea of the value of money; some are
tricky and treacherous and pretty bad lots;
some are not, but are decent enough people
like Thorin and Company, if you don’t expect
too much.

The stars were coming out behind him in a pale
sky barred with black when the hobbit crept
through the enchanted door and stole into the
Mountain. It was far easier going than he
expected. This was no goblin entrance, or
rough wood-elves’ cave. It was a passage
made by dwarves, at the height of their wealth
and skill: straight as a ruler, smooth-floored and
smooth-sided, going with a gentle never-varying
slope direct — to some distant end in the
blackness below.

After a while Balin bade Bilbo “Good luck!”
and stopped where he could still see the faint
outline of the door, and by a trick of the echoes
of the tunnel hear the rustle of the whispering
voices of the others just outside. Then the

hobbit slipped on his ring, and warned by the
echoes to take more than hobbit’s care to
make no sound, he crept noiselessly down,
down, down into the dark. He was trembling
with fear, but his little face was set and grim.
Already he was a very different hobbit from the
one that had run out without a pocket-
handkerchief from Bag-End long ago. He had
not had a pocket-handkerchief for ages. He
loosened his dagger in its sheath, tightened his
belt, and went on.

“Now you are in for it at last, Bilbo Baggins,” he
said to himself. “You went and put your foot right
in it that night of the party, and now you have got
to pull it out and pay for it! Dear me, what a fool
I was and am!” said the least Tookish part of
him. “I have absolutely no use for dragon-
guarded treasures, and the whole lot could stay
here for ever, if only I could wake up and find
this beastly tunnel was my own front-hall at
home!”

He did not wake up of course, but went still
on and on, till all sign of the door behind had
faded away. He was altogether alone. Soon he
thought it was beginning to feel warm. “Is that a
kind of a glow I seem to see coming right

ahead down there?” he thought.

It was. As he went forward it grew and grew,
till there was no doubt about it. It was a red light
steadily getting redder and redder. Also it was
now undoubtedly hot in the tunnel. Wisps of
vapour floated up and past him and he began to
sweat. A sound, too, began to throb in his ears,
a sort of bubbling like the noise of a large pot
galloping on the fire, mixed with a rumble as of
a gigantic tom-cat purring. This grew to the
unmistakable gurgling noise of some vast
animal snoring in its sleep down there in the red
glow in front of him.

It was at this point that Bilbo stopped.
Going on from there was the bravest thing he
ever did. The tremendous things that happened
afterwards were as nothing compared to it. He
fought the real battle in the tunnel alone, before
he ever saw the vast danger that lay in wait. At
any rate after a short halt go on he did; and you
can picture him coming to the end of the tunnel,
an opening of much the same size and shape
as the door above. Through it peeps the
hobbit’s little head. Before him lies the great
bottom-most cellar or dungeon-hall of the
ancient dwarves right at the Mountain’s root. It
is almost dark so that its vastness can only be
dimly guessed, but rising from the near side of
the rocky floor there is a great glow. The glow of

Smaug!

There he lay, a vast red-golden dragon, fast
asleep; a thrumming came from his jaws and
nostrils, and wisps of smoke, but his fires were
low in slumber. Beneath him, under all his limbs
and his huge coiled tail, and about him on all
sides stretching away across the unseen floors,
lay countless piles of precious things, gold
wrought and unwrought, gems and jewels, and
silver red-stained in the ruddy light.

Smaug lay, with wings folded like an
immeasurable bat, turned partly on one side, so
that the hobbit could see his underparts and his
long pale belly crusted with gems and
fragments of gold from his long lying on his
costly bed. Behind him where the walls were
nearest could dimly be seen coats of mail,
helms and axes, swords and spears hanging;
and there in rows stood great jars and vessels
filled with a wealth that could not be guessed.

To say that Bilbo’s breath was taken away
is no description at all. There are no words left
to express his staggerment, since Men
changed the language that they learned of elves
in the days when all the world was wonderful.
Bilbo had heard tell and sing of dragon-hoards

before, but the splendour, the lust, the glory of
such treasure had never yet come home to him.
His heart was filled and pierced with
enchantment and with the desire of dwarves;
and he gazed motionless, almost forgetting the
frightful guardian, at the gold beyond price and
count.

He gazed for what seemed an age, before
drawn almost against his will, he stole from the
shadow of the doorway, across the floor to the
nearest edge of the mounds of treasure. Above
him the sleeping dragon lay, a dire menace
even in his sleep. He grasped a great two-
handled cup, as heavy as he could carry, and
cast one fearful eye upwards. Smaug stirred a
wing, opened a claw, the rumble of his snoring
changed its note.

Then Bilbo fled. But the dragon did not
wake — not yet — but shifted into other dreams of
greed and violence, lying there in his stolen hall
while the little hobbit toiled back up the long
tunnel. His heart was beating and a more
fevered shaking was in his legs than when he
was going down, but still he clutched the cup,
and his chief thought was: “I’ve done it! This will
show them. ‘More like a grocer than a burglar’

indeed! Well, we’ll hear no more of that.”

Nor did he. Balin was overjoyed to see the
hobbit again, and as delighted as he was
surprised. He picked Bilbo up and carried him
out into the open air. It was midnight and clouds
had covered the stars, but Bilbo lay with his
eyes shut, gasping and taking pleasure in the
feel of the fresh air again, and hardly noticing
the excitement of the dwarves, or how they
praised him and patted him on the back and put
themselves and all their families for generations
to come at his service.

The dwarves were still passing the cup from
hand to hand and talking delightedly of the
recovery of their treasure, when suddenly a vast
rumbling woke in the mountain underneath as if
it was an old volcano that had made up its mind
to start eruptions once again. The door behind
them was pulled nearly to, and blocked from
closing with a stone, but up the long tunnel
came the dreadful echoes, from far down in the
depths, of a bellowing and a trampling that
made the ground beneath them tremble.

Then the dwarves forgot their joy and their
confident boasts of a moment before and
cowered down in fright. Smaug was still to be

reckoned with. It does not do to leave a live
dragon out of your calculations, if you live near
him. Dragons may not have much real use for
all their wealth, but they know it to an ounce as a
rule, especially after long possession; and
Smaug was no exception. He had passed from
an uneasy dream (in which a warrior, altogether
insignificant in size but provided with a bitter
sword and great courage, figured most
unpleasantly) to a doze, and from a doze to
wide waking. There was a breath of strange air
in his cave. Could there be a draught from that
little hole? He had never felt quite happy about
it, though it was so small, and now he glared at
it in suspicion and wondered why he had never
blocked it up. Of late he had half fancied he had
caught the dim echoes of a knocking sound
from far above that came down through it to his
lair. He stirred and stretched forth his neck to
sniff. Then he missed the cup!

Thieves! Fire! Murder! Such a thing had not
happened since first he came to the Mountain!
His rage passes description — the sort of rage
that is only seen when rich folk that have more
than they can enjoy suddenly lose something
that they have long had but have never before
used or wanted. His fire belched forth, the hall
smoked, he shook the mountain-roots. He thrust
his head in vain at the little hole, and then

coiling his length together, roaring like thunder
underground, he sped from his deep lair
through its great door, out into the huge
passages of the mountain-palace and up
towards the Front Gate.

To hunt the whole mountain till he had
caught the thief and had torn and trampled him
was his one thought. He issued from the Gate,
the waters rose in fierce whistling steam, and
up he soared blazing into the air and settled on
the mountain-top in a spout of green and scarlet
flame. The dwarves heard the awful rumour of
his flight, and they crouched against the walls of
the grassy terrace cringing under boulders,
hoping somehow to escape the frightful eyes of
the hunting dragon.

There they would have all been killed, if it
had not been for Bilbo once again. “Quick!
Quick!” he gasped. “The door! The tunnel! It’s
no good here.”

Roused by these words they were just
about to creep inside the tunnel when Bifur
gave a cry: “My cousins! Bombur and Bofur —
we have forgotten them, they are down in the
valley!”

“They will be slain, and all our ponies too,
and all our stores lost,” moaned the others. “We
can do nothing.”

“Nonsense!” said Thorin, recovering his

dignity. “We cannot leave them. Get inside Mr.
Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili —
the dragon shan’t have all of us. Now you
others, where are the ropes? Be quick!”

Those were perhaps the worst moments
they had been through yet. The horrible sounds
of Smaug’s anger were echoing in the stony
hollows far above; at any moment he might
come blazing down or fly whirling round and find
them there, near the perilous cliffs edge hauling
madly on the ropes. Up came Bofur, and still all
was safe. Up came Bombur, puffing and
blowing while the ropes creaked, and still all
was safe. Up came some tools and bundles of
stores, and then danger was upon them.

A whirring noise was heard. A red light
touched the points of standing rocks. The
dragon came.

They had barely time to fly back to the
tunnel, pulling and dragging in their bundles,
when Smaug came hurtling from the North,
licking the mountain-sides with flame, beating
his great wings with a noise like a roaring wind.
His hot breath shrivelled the grass before the
door, and drove in through the crack they had
left and scorched them as they lay hid.
Flickering fires leaped up and black rock-
shadows danced. Then darkness fell as he
passed again. The ponies screamed with

terror, burst their ropes and galloped wildly off.
The dragon swooped and turned to pursue
them, and was gone.

“That’ll be the end of our poor beasts!” said
Thorin. “Nothing can escape Smaug once he
sees it. Here we are and here we shall have to
stay, unless any one fancies tramping the long
open miles back to the river with Smaug on the
watch!”

It was not a pleasant thought! They crept
further down the tunnel, and there they lay and
shivered though it was warm and stuffy, until
dawn came pale through the crack of the door.
Every now and again through the night they
could hear the roar of the flying dragon grow
and then pass and fade, as he hunted round
and round the mountain-sides.

He guessed from the ponies, and from the
traces of the camps he had discovered, that
men had come up from the river and the lake
and had scaled the mountain-side from the
valley where the ponies had been standing; but
the door withstood his searching eye, and the
little high-walled bay had kept out his fiercest
flames. Long he had hunted in vain till the dawn
chilled his wrath and he went back to his golden
couch to sleep — and to gather new strength. He
would not forget or forgive the theft, not if a
thousand years turned him to smouldering

stone, but he could afford to wait. Slow and
silent he crept back to his lair and half closed
his eyes.

When morning came the terror of the
dwarves grew less. They realized that dangers
of this kind were inevitable in dealing with such
a guardian, and that it was no good giving up
their quest yet. Nor could they get away just
now, as Thorin had pointed out. Their ponies
were lost or killed, and they would have to wait
some time before Smaug relaxed his watch
sufficiently for them to dare the long way on foot.
Luckily they had saved enough of their stores to
last them still for some time.

They debated long on what was to be done,
but they could think of no way of getting rid of
Smaug — which had always been a weak point
in their plans, as Bilbo felt inclined to point out.
Then as is the nature of folk that are thoroughly
perplexed, they began to grumble at the hobbit,
blaming him for what had at first so pleased
them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up
Smaug’s wrath so soon.

“What else do you suppose a burglar is to
do?” asked Bilbo angrily. “I was not engaged to
kill dragons, that is warrior’s work, but to steal
treasure. I made the best beginning I could. Did
you expect me to trot back with the whole hoard
of Thror on my back? If there is any grumbling to

be done, I think I might have a say. You ought to
have brought five hundred burglars not one. I
am sure it reflects great credit on your
grandfather, but you cannot pretend that you
ever made the vast extent of his wealth clear to
me. I should want hundreds of years to bring it
all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as
tame as a rabbit.”

After that of course the dwarves begged his
pardon. “What then do you propose we should
do, Mr. Baggins?” asked Thorin politely.

“I have no idea at the moment — if you mean
about removing the treasure. That obviously
depends entirely on some new turn of luck and
the getting rid of Smaug. Getting rid of dragons
is not at all in my line, but I will do my best to
think about it. Personally I have no hopes at all,
and wish I was safe back at home.”

"Never mind that for the moment! What are
we to do now, to-day?”

“Well, if you really want my advice, I should
say we can do nothing but stay where we are.
By day we can no doubt creep out safely
enough to take the air. Perhaps before long one
or two could be chosen to go back to the store
by the river and replenish our supplies. But in
the meanwhile everyone ought to be well inside
the tunnel by night.

“Now I will make you an offer. I have got my

ring and will creep down this very noon — then if
ever Smaug ought to be napping — and see
what he is up to. Perhaps something will turn
up. ‘Every worm has his weak spot,’ as my
father used to say, though I am sure it was not
from personal experience.”

Naturally the dwarves accepted the offer
eagerly. Already they had come to respect little
Bilbo. Now he had become the real leader in
their adventure. He had begun to have ideas
and plans of his own. When midday came he
got ready for another journey down into the
Mountain. He did not like it of course, but it was
not so bad now he knew, more or less, what
was in front of him. Had he known more about
dragons and their wily ways, he might have
been more frightened and less hopeful of
catching this one napping.

The sun was shining when he started, but it
was as dark as night in the tunnel. The light from
the door, almost closed, soon faded as he went
down. So silent was his going that smoke on a
gentle wind could hardly have surpassed it, and
he was inclined to feel a bit proud of himself as
he drew near the lower door. There was only the
veryfaintestglowto be seen.

“Old Smaug is weary and asleep,” he
thought. “He can’t see me and he won’t hear
me. Cheer up Bilbo!” He had forgotten or had

never heard about dragons’ sense of smell. It is
also an awkward fact that they can keep half an
eye open watching while they sleep, if they are
suspicious.

Smaug certainly looked fast asleep, almost
dead and dark, with scarcely a snore more than
a whiff of unseen steam, when Bilbo peeped
once more from the entrance. He was just about
to step out on to the floor when he caught a
sudden thin and piercing ray of red from under
the drooping lid of Smaug’s left eye. He was
only pretending to sleep! He was watching the
tunnel entrance! Hurriedly Bilbo stepped back
and blessed the luck of his ring. Then Smaug
spoke.

“Well, thief! I smell you and I feel your air. I hear
your breath. Come along! Help yourself again,
there is plenty and to spare!”

But Bilbo was not quite so unlearned in
dragon-lore as all that, and if Smaug hoped to
get him to come nearer so easily he was
disappointed. "No thank you, O Smaug the
Tremendous!” he replied. “I did not come for
presents. I only wished to have a look at you
and see if you were truly as great as tales say. I
did not believe them.”

“Do you now?” said the dragon somewhat
flattered, even thouqh he did not believe a word
of it.

“Truly songs and tales fall utterly short of the
reality, O Smaug the Chiefest and Greatest of
Calamities,” replied Bilbo.

“You have nice manners for a thief and a
liar,” said the dragon. “You seem familiar with
my name, but I don’t seem to remember
smelling you before. Who are you and where do
you come from, may I ask?”

“You may indeed! I come from under the hill,
and under the hills and over the hills my paths
led. And through the air. I am he that walks
unseen.”

“So I can well believe,” said Smaug, “but
that is hardly your usual name.”

“I am the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the
stinging fly. I was chosen for the lucky number.”

“Lovely titles!” sneered the dragon. “But
lucky numbers don’t always come off.”

“I am he that buries his friends alive and
drowns them and draws them alive again from
the water. I came from the end of a bag, but no
bag went over me.”

“These don’t sound so creditable,” scoffed
Smaug.

“I am the friend of bears and the guest of
eagles. I am Ringwinner and Luckwearer; and I

am Barrel-rider,” went on Bilbo beginning to be
pleased with his riddling.

“That’s better!” said Smaug. “But don’t let
your imagination run away with you!”

This of course is the way to talk to dragons, if
you don’t want to reveal your proper name
(which is wise), and don’t want to infuriate them
by a flat refusal (which is also very wise). No
dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk
and of wasting time trying to understand it.
There was a lot here which Smaug did not
understand at all (though I expect you do, since
you know all about Bilbo’s adventures to which
he was referring), but he thought he understood
enough, and he chuckled in his wicked inside.

“I thought so last night,” he smiled to
himself. “Lake-men, some nasty scheme of
those miserable tub-trading Lake-men, or I’m a
lizard. I haven’t been down that way for an age
and an age; but I will soon alter that!”

“Very well, O Barrel-rider!” he said aloud.
“Maybe Barrel was your pony’s name; and
maybe not, though it was fat enough. You may
walk unseen, but you did not walk all the way.
Let me tell you I ate six ponies last night and I
shall catch and eat all the others before long. In

return for the excellent meal I will give you one
piece of advice for your good: don’t have more
to do with dwarves than you can help!”

“Dwarves!” said Bilbo in pretended
surprise.

“Don’t talk to me!” said Smaug. “I know the
smell (and taste) of dwarf — no one better. Don’t
tell me that I can eat a dwarf-ridden pony and
not know it! You’ll come to a bad end, if you go
with such friends, Thief Barrel-rider. I don’t mind
if you go back and tell them so from me.” But he
did not tell Bilbo that there was one smell he
could not make out at all, hobbit-smell; it was
quite outside his experience and puzzled him
mightily.

“I suppose you got a fair price for that cup
last night?” he went on. “Come now, did you?
Nothing at all! Well, that’s just like them. And I
suppose they are skulking outside, and your job
is to do all the dangerous work and get what
you can when I’m not looking — for them? And
you will get a fair share? Don’t you believe it! If
you get off alive, you will be lucky.”

Bilbo was now beginning to feel really
uncomfortable. Whenever Smaug’s roving eye,
seeking for him in the shadows, flashed across

him, he trembled, and an unaccountable desire
seized hold of him to rush out and reveal
himself and tell all the truth to Smaug. In fact he
was in grievous danger of coming under the
dragon-spell. But plucking up courage he spoke
again.

“You don’t know everything, O Smaug the
Mighty,” said he. “Not gold alone brought us
hither.”

“Ha! Ha! You admit the ‘us’” laughed
Smaug. “Why not say ‘us fourteen’ and be done
with it, Mr. Lucky Number? I am pleased to hear
that you had other business in these parts
besides my gold. In that case you may,
perhaps, not altogether waste your time.

“I don’t know if it has occurred to you that,
even if you could steal the gold bit by bit — a
matter of a hundred years or so — you could not
get it very far? Not much use on the mountain-
side? Not much use in the forest? Bless me!
Had you never thought of the catch? A
fourteenth share, I suppose, or something like it,
those were the terms, eh? But what about
delivery? What about cartage? What about
armed guards and tolls?” And Smaug laughed
aloud. He had a wicked and a wily heart, and he
knew his guesses were not far out, though he
suspected that the Lake-men were at the back
of the plans, and that most of the plunder was

meant to stop there in the town by the shore that
in his young days had been called Esgaroth.

You will hardly believe it, but poor Bilbo was
really very taken aback. So far all his thoughts
and energies had been concentrated on getting
to the Mountain and finding the entrance. He
had never bothered to wonder how the treasure
was to be removed, certainly never how any
part of it that might fall to his share was to be
brought back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill.

Now a nasty suspicion began to grow in his
mind — had the dwarves forgotten this important
point too, or were they laughing in their sleeves
at him all the time? That is the effect that
dragon-talk has on the inexperienced. Bilbo of
course ought to have been on his guard; but
Smaug had rather an overwhelming personality.

“I tell you," he said, in an effort to remain
loyal to his friends and to keep his end up, “that
gold was only an afterthought with us. We came
over hill and under hill, by wave and wind, for
Revenge. Surely, O Smaug the unassessably
wealthy, you must realize that your success has
made you some bitter enemies?”

Then Smaug really did laugh — a
devastating sound which shook Bilbo to the
floor, while far up in the tunnel the dwarves
huddled together and imagined that the hobbit
had come to a sudden and a nasty end.

"Revenge!” he snorted, and the light of his
eyes lit the hall from floor to ceiling like scarlet
lightning. ‘‘Revenge! The King under the
Mountain is dead and where are his kin that
dare seek revenge? Girion Lord of Dale is
dead, and I have eaten his people like a wolf
among sheep, and where are his sons’ sons
that dare approach me? I kill where I wish and
none dare resist. I laid low the warriors of old
and their like is not in the world today. Then I
was but young and tender. Now I am old and
strong, strong, strong, Thief in the Shadows!” he
gloated. “My armour is like tenfold shields, my
teeth are swords, my claws spears, the shock
of my tail a thunderbolt, my wings a hurricane,
and my breath death!”

“I have always understood,” said Bilbo in a
frightened squeak, “that dragons were softer
underneath, especially in the region of the — er
— chest; but doubtless one so fortified has
thought of that.”

The dragon stopped short in his boasting.
“Your information is antiquated,” he snapped. “I
am armoured above and below with iron scales
and hard gems. No blade can pierce me.”

“I might have guessed it,” said Bilbo. “Truly
there can nowhere be found the equal of Lord
Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to
possess a waistcoat of fine diamonds!”

“Yes, it is rare and wonderful, indeed,” said
Smaug absurdly pleased. He did not know that
the hobbit had already caught a glimpse of his
peculiar under-covering on his previous visit,
and was itching for a closer view for reasons of
his own. The dragon rolled over. “Look!” he
said. “What do you say to that?”

“Dazzlingly marvellous! Perfect! Flawless!
Staggering!” exclaimed Bilbo aloud, but what
he thought inside was: “Old fool! Why, there is a
large patch in the hollow of his left breast as
bare as a snail out of its shell!”

After he had seen that Mr. Baggins’ one
idea was to get away. “Well, I really must not
detain Your Magnificence any longer,” he said,
“or keep you from much needed rest. Ponies
take some catching, I believe, after a long start.
And so do burglars,” he added as a parting
shot, as he darted back and fled up the tunnel.

It was an unfortunate remark, for the dragon
spouted terrific flames after him, and fast
though he sped up the slope, he had not gone
nearly far enough to be comfortable before the
ghastly head of Smaug was thrust against the
opening behind. Luckily the whole head and
jaws could not squeeze in, but the nostrils sent
forth fire and vapour to pursue him, and he was
nearly overcome, and stumbled blindly on in
great pain and fear. He had been feeling rather

pleased with the cleverness of his conversation
with Smaug, but his mistake at the end shook
him into better sense.

"Never laugh at live dragons, Bilbo you
fool!” he said to himself, and it became a
favourite saying of his later, and passed into a
proverb. ‘‘You aren’t nearly through this
adventure yet,” he added, and that was pretty
true as well.

The afternoon was turning into evening when he
came out again and stumbled and fell in a faint
on the ‘doorstep’. The dwarves revived him,
and doctored his scorches as well as they
could; but it was a long time before the hair on
the back of his head and his heels grew
properly again: it had all been singed and
frizzled right down to the skin. In the meanwhile
his friends did their best to cheer him up; and
they were eager for his story, especially wanting
to know why the dragon had made such an
awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped.

But the hobbit was worried and
uncomfortable, and they had difficulty in getting
anything out of him. On thinking things over he
was now regretting some of the things he had
said to the dragon, and was not eager to repeat

them. The old thrush was sitting on a rock near
by with his head cocked on one side, listening
to all that was said. It shows what an ill temper
Bilbo was in: he picked up a stone and threw it
at the thrush, which merely fluttered aside and
came back.

“Drat the bird!” said Bilbo crossly. “I believe
he is listening, and I don’t like the look of him.”

“Leave him alone!” said Thorin. “The
thrushes are good and friendly — this is a very
old bird indeed, and is maybe the last left of the
ancient breed that used to live about here, tame
to the hands of my father and grandfather. They
were a long-lived and magical race, and this
might even be one of those that were alive then,
a couple of hundreds of years or more ago. The
Men of Dale used to have the trick of
understanding their language, and used them
for messengers to fly to the Men of the Lake
and elsewhere.”

“Well, he’ll have news to take to Lake-town
all right, if that is what he is after,” said Bilbo;
“though I don’t suppose there are any people
left there that trouble with thrush-language.”

“Why what has happened?” cried the
dwarves. “Do get on with your tale!”

So Bilbo told them all he could remember,
and he confessed that he had a nasty feeling
that the dragon guessed too much from his

riddles added to the camps and the ponies. “I
am sure he knows we came from Lake-town
and had help from there; and I have a horrible
feeling that his next move may be in that
direction. I wish to goodness I had never said
that about Barrel-rider; it would make even a
blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-
men.”

“Well, well! It cannot be helped, and it is
difficult not to slip in talking to a dragon, or so I
have always heard,” said Balin anxious to
comfort him. “I think you did very well, if you ask
me — you found out one very useful thing at any
rate, and got home alive, and that is more than
most can say who have had words with the likes
of Smaug. It may be a mercy and a blessing yet
to know of the bare patch in the old Worm’s
diamond waistcoat.”

That turned the conversation, and they all
began discussing dragon-slayings historical,
dubious, and mythical, and the various sorts of
stabs and jabs and undercuts, and the different
arts devices and stratagems by which they had
been accomplished. The general opinion was
that catching a dragon napping was not as easy
as it sounded, and the attempt to stick one or
prod one asleep was more likely to end in
disaster than a bold frontal attack. All the while
they talked the thrush listened, till at last when

the stars began to peep forth, it silently spread
its wings and flew away. And all the while they
talked and the shadows lengthened Bilbo
became more and more unhappy and his
foreboding grew.

At last he interrupted them. “I am sure we
are very unsafe here,” he said, “and I don’t see
the point of sitting here. The dragon has
withered all the pleasant green, and anyway the
night has come and it is cold. But I feel it in my
bones that this place will be attacked again.
Smaug knows now how I came down to his hall,
and you can trust him to guess where the other
end of the tunnel is. He will break all this side of
the Mountain to bits, if necessary, to stop up our
entrance, and if we are smashed with it the
better he will like it.”

“You are very gloomy, Mr. Baggins!” said
Thorin. “Why has not Smaug blocked the lower
end, then, if he is so eager to keep us out? He
has not, or we should have heard him.”

“I don’t know, I don’t know — because at first
he wanted to try and lure me in again, I
suppose, and now perhaps because he is
waiting till after tonight’s hunt, or because he
does not want to damage his bedroom if he can
help it — but I wish you would not argue. Smaug
will be coming out at any minute now, and our
only hope is to get well in the tunnel and shut the

door.”

He seemed so much in earnest that the
dwarves at last did as he said, though they
delayed shutting the door — it seemed a
desperate plan, for no one knew whether or
how they could get it open again from the
inside, and the thought of being shut in a place
from which the only way out led through the
dragon’s lair was not one they liked. Also
everything seemed quite quiet, both outside
and down the tunnel. So for a longish while they
sat inside not far down from the half-open door
and went on talking.

The talk turned to the dragon’s wicked
words about the dwarves. Bilbo wished he had
never heard them, or at least that he could feel
quite certain that the dwarves now were
absolutely honest when they declared that they
had never thought at all about what would
happen after the treasure had been won. “We
knew it would be a desperate venture,” said
Thorin, “and we know that still; and I still think
that when we have won it will be time enough to
think what to do about it. As for your share, Mr.
Baggins, I assure you we are more than grateful
and you shall choose your own fourteenth, as
soon as we have anything to divide. I am sorry if
you are worried about transport, and I admit the
difficulties are great — the lands have not

become less wild with the passing of time,
rather the reverse — but we will do whatever we
can for you, and take our share of the cost when
the time comes. Believe me or not as you like!”

From that the talk turned to the great hoard
itself and to the things that Thorin and Balin
remembered. They wondered if they were still
lying there unharmed in the hall below: the
spears that were made for the armies of the
great King Bladorthin (long since dead), each
had a thrice-forged head and their shafts were
inlaid with cunning gold, but they were never
delivered or paid for; shields made for warriors
long dead; the great golden cup of Thror, two-
handed, hammered and carven with birds and
flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels;
coats of mail gilded and silvered and
impenetrable; the necklace of Girion, Lord of
Dale, made of five hundred emeralds green as
grass, which he gave for the arming of his
eldest son in a coat of dwarf-linked rings the
like of which had never been made before, for it
was wrought of pure silver to the power and
strength of triple steel. But fairest of all was the
great white gem, which the dwarves had found
beneath the roots of the Mountain, the Heart of
the Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain.

“The Arkenstone! The Arkenstone!”
murmured Thorin in the dark, half dreaming with

his chin upon his knees. “It was like a globe with
a thousand facets; it shone like silver in the
firelight, like water in the sun, like snow under
the stars, like rain upon the Moon!”

But the enchanted desire of the hoard had
fallen from Bilbo. All through their talk he was
only half listening to them. He sat nearest to the
door with one ear cocked for any beginnings of
a sound without, his other was alert for echoes
beyond the murmurs of the dwarves, for any
whisper of a movement from far below.

Darkness grew deeper and he grew ever
more uneasy. “Shut the door!” he begged them,
“I fear that dragon in my marrow. I like this
silence far less than the uproar of last night.
Shut the door before it is too late!”

Something in his voice gave the dwarves
an uncomfortable feeling. Slowly Thorin shook
off his dreams and getting up he kicked away
the stone that wedged the door. Then they thrust
upon it, and it closed with a snap and a clang.
No trace of a keyhole was there left on the
inside. They were shut in the Mountain!

And not a moment too soon. They had
hardly gone any distance down the tunnel when
a blow smote the side of the Mountain like the
crash of battering-rams made of forest oaks
and swung by giants. The rock boomed, the
walls cracked and stones fell from the roof on

their heads. What would have happened if the
door had still been open I don’t like to think.
They fled further down the tunnel glad to be still
alive, while behind them outside they heard the
roar and rumble of Smaug’s fury. He was
breaking rocks to pieces, smashing wall and
cliff with the lashings of his huge tail, till their
little lofty camping ground, the scorched grass,
the thrush’s stone, the snail-covered walls, the
narrow ledge, and all disappeared in a jumble
of smithereens, and an avalanche of splintered
stones fell over the cliff into the valley below.

Smaug had left his lair in silent stealth,
quietly soared into the air, and then floated
heavy and slow in the dark like a monstrous
crow, down the wind towards the west of the
Mountain, in the hopes of catching unawares
something or somebody there, and of spying
the outlet to the passage which the thief had
used. This was the outburst of his wrath when
he could find nobody and see nothing, even
where he guessed the outlet must actually be.

After he had let off his rage in this way he
felt better and he thought in his heart that he
would not be troubled again from that direction.
In the meanwhile he had further vengeance to
take. “Barrel-rider!” he snorted. “Your feet came
from the waterside and up the water you came
without a doubt. I don’t know your smell, but if

you are not one of those men of the Lake, you
had their help. They shall see me and
remember who is the real King under the
Mountain!”

He rose in fire and went away south
towards the Running River.

Chapter X III

NOT AT HOME

In the meanwhile, the dwarves sat in darkness,
and utter silence fell about them. Little they ate
and little they spoke. They could not count the
passing of time; and they scarcely dared to
move, for the whisper of their voices echoed
and rustled in the tunnel. If they dozed, they
woke still to darkness and to silence going on
unbroken. At last after days and days of waiting,
as it seemed, when they were becoming
choked and dazed for want of air, they could
bear it no longer. They would almost have
welcomed sounds from below of the dragon’s
return. In the silence they feared some cunning
devilry of his, but they could not sit there for
ever.

Thorin spoke: “Let us try the door!” he said.
“I must feel the wind on my face soon or die. I
think I would rather be smashed by Smaug in
the open than suffocate in here!” So several of

the dwarves got up and groped back to where
the door had been. But they found that the
upper end of the tunnel had been shattered and
blocked with broken rock. Neither key nor the
magic it had once obeyed would ever open that
door again.

“We are trapped!” they groaned. “This is the
end. We shall die here.”

But somehow, just when the dwarves were
most despairing, Bilbo felt a strange lightening
of the heart, as if a heavyweight had gone from
under his waistcoat.

“Come, come!” he said. ‘“While there’s life
there’s hope!’ as my father used to say, and
Third time pays for all.’ I am going down the
tunnel once again. I have been that way twice,
when I knew there was a dragon at the other
end, so I will risk a third visit when I am no
longer sure. Anyway the only way out is down.
And I think this time you had better all come with
me.”

In desperation they agreed, and Thorin was
the first to go forward by Bilbo’s side.

"Now do be careful!” whispered the hobbit,
“and as quiet as you can be! There may be no
Smaug at the bottom, but then again there may
be. Don’t let us take any unnecessary risks!”

Down, down they went. The dwarves could
not, of course, compare with the hobbit in real

stealth, and they made a deal of puffing and
shuffling which echoes magnified alarmingly;
but though every now and again Bilbo in fear
stopped and listened, not a sound stirred
below. Near the bottom, as well as he could
judge, Bilbo slipped on his ring and went
ahead. But he did not need it: the darkness was
complete, and they were all invisible, ring or no
ring. In fact so black was it that the hobbit came
to the opening unexpectedly, put his hand on
air, stumbled forward, and rolled headlong into
the hall!

There he lay face downwards on the floor
and did not dare to get up, or hardly even to
breathe. But nothing moved. There was not a
gleam of light — unless, as it seemed to him,
when at last he slowly raised his head, there
was a pale white glint, above him and far off in
the gloom. But certainly it was not a spark of
dragon-fire, though the worm-stench was heavy
in the place, and the taste of vapour was on his
tongue.

At length Mr. Baggins could bear it no
longer. “Confound you, Smaug, you worm!” he
squeaked aloud. “Stop playing hide-and-seek!
Give me a light, and then eat me, if you can
catch me!”

Faint echoes ran round the unseen hall, but
there was no answer.

Bilbo got up, and found that he did not know
in what direction to turn.

"Now I wonder what on earth Smaug is
playing at,” he said. “He is not at home today
(or tonight, or whatever it is), I do believe. If Oin
and Gloin have not lost their tinder-boxes,
perhaps we can make a little light, and have a
look round before the luck turns.”

“Light!” he cried. “Can anybody make a
light?”

The dwarves, of course, were very alarmed
when Bilbo fell forward down the step with a
bump into the hall, and they sat huddled just
where he had left them at the end of the tunnel.

“Sh! sh!” they hissed, when they heard his
voice; and though that helped the hobbit to find
out where they were, it was some time before
he could get anything else out of them. But in
the end, when Bilbo actually began to stamp on
the floor, and screamed out “light!” at the top of
his shrill voice, Thorin gave way, and Oin and
Gloin were sent back to their bundles at the top
of the tunnel.

After a while a twinkling gleam showed
them returning, Oin with a small pine-torch alight
in his hand, and Gloin with a bundle of others

under his arm. Quickly Bilbo trotted to the door
and took the torch; but he could not persuade
the dwarves to light the others or to come and
join him yet. As Thorin carefully explained, Mr.
Baggins was still officially their expert burglar
and investigator. If he liked to risk a light, that
was his affair. They would wait in the tunnel for
his report. So they sat near the door and
watched.

They saw the little dark shape of the hobbit
start across the floor holding his tiny light aloft.
Every now and again, while he was still near
enough, they caught a glint and a tinkle as he
stumbled on some golden thing. The light grew
smaller as he wandered away into the vast hall;
then it began to rise dancing into the air. Bilbo
was climbing the great mound of treasure.
Soon he stood upon the top, and still went on.
Then they saw him halt and stoop for a moment;
but they did not know the reason.

It was the Arkenstone, the Heart of the
Mountain. So Bilbo guessed from Thorin’s
description; but indeed there could not be two
such gems, even in so marvellous a hoard,
even in all the world. Ever as he climbed, the
same white gleam had shone before him and
drawn his feet towards it. Slowly it grew to a
little globe of pallid light. Now as he came near,
it was tinged with a flickering sparkle of many

colours at the surface, reflected and splintered
from the wavering light of his torch. At last he
looked down upon it, and he caught his breath.
The great jewel shone before his feet of its own
inner light, and yet, cut and fashioned by the
dwarves, who had dug it from the heart of the
mountain long ago, it took all light that fell upon
it and changed it into ten thousand sparks of
white radiance shot with glints of the rainbow.

Suddenly Bilbo’s arm went towards it drawn
by its enchantment. His small hand would not
close about it, for it was a large and heavy gem;
but he lifted it, shut his eyes, and put it in his
deepest pocket.

"Now I am a burglar indeed!” thought he.
“But I suppose I must tell the dwarves about it —
some time. They did say I could pick and
choose my own share; and I think I would
choose this, if they took all the rest!” All the
same he had an uncomfortable feeling that the
picking and choosing had not really been meant
to include this marvellous gem, and that trouble
would yet come of it.

Now he went on again. Down the other side
of the great mound he climbed, and the spark of
his torch vanished from the sight of the watching
dwarves. But soon they saw it far away in the
distance again. Bilbo was crossing the floor of
the hall.

He went on, until he came to the great
doors at the further side, and there a draught of
air refreshed him, but it almost puffed out his
light. He peeped timidly through, and caught a
glimpse of great passages and of the dim
beginnings of wide stairs going up into the
gloom. And still there was no sight nor sound of
Smaug. He was just going to turn and go back,
when a black shape swooped at him, and
brushed his face. He squeaked and started,
stumbled backwards and fell. His torch dropped
head downwards and went out!

“Only a bat, I suppose and hope!” he said
miserably. “But now what am I to do? Which is
East, South, North, or West?”

“Thorin! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fili! Kili!” he cried
as loud as he could — it seemed a thin little
noise in the wide blackness. “The light’s gone
out! Someone come and find me and help me!”
For the moment his courage had failed
altogether.

Faintly the dwarves heard his small cries,
though the only word they could catch was
“help!”

“Now what on earth or under it has
happened?” said Thorin. “Certainly not the
dragon, or he would not go on squeaking.”

They waited a moment or two, and still there
were no dragon-noises, no sound at all in fact

but Bilbo’s distant voice. “Come, one of you,
get another light or two!” Thorin ordered. “It
seems we have got to go and help our burglar.”

“It is about our turn to help,” said Balin, “and
I am quite willing to go. Anyway I expect it is
safe for the moment.”

Gloin lit several more torches, and then they
all crept out, one by one, and went along the
wall as hurriedly as they could. It was not long
before they met Bilbo himself coming back
towards them. His wits had quickly returned as
soon as he saw the twinkle of their lights.

“Only a bat and a dropped torch, nothing
worse!” he said in answer to their questions.
Though they were much relieved, they were
inclined to be grumpy at being frightened for
nothing; but what they would have said, if he
had told them at that moment about the
Arkenstone, I don’t know. The mere fleeting
glimpses of treasure which they had caught as
they went along had rekindled all the fire of their
dwarvish hearts; and when the heart of a dwarf,
even the most respectable, is wakened by gold
and by jewels, he grows suddenly bold, and he
may become fierce.

The dwarves indeed no longer needed any
urging. All were now eager to explore the hall
while they had the chance, and willing to believe
that, for the present, Smaug was away from

home. Each now gripped a lighted torch; and
as they gazed, first on one side and then on
another, they forgot fear and even caution. They
spoke aloud, and cried out to one another, as
they lifted old treasures from the mound or from
the wall and held them in the light, caressing
and fingering them.

Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood,
and finding still hanging there many golden
harps strung with silver they took them and
struck them; and being magical (and also
untouched by the dragon, who had small
interest in music) they were still in tune. The
dark hall was filled with a melody that had long
been silent. But most of the dwarves were more
practical: they gathered gems and stuffed their
pockets, and let what they could not carry fall
back through their fingers with a sigh. Thorin
was not least among these; but always he
searched from side to side for something which
he could not find. It was the Arkenstone; but he
spoke of it yet to no one.

Now the dwarves took down mail and
weapons from the walls, and armed
themselves. Royal indeed did Thorin look, clad
in a coat of gold-plated rings, with a silver-
hafted axe in a belt crusted with scarlet stones.

“Mr. Baggins!” he cried. “Here is the first
payment of your reward! Cast off your old coat

and put on this!”

With that he put on Bilbo a small coat of
mail, wrought for some young elf-prince long
ago. It was of silver-steel, which the elves call
mithril, and with it went a belt of pearls and
crystals. A light helm of figured leather,
strengthened beneath with hoops of steel, and
studded about the brim with white gems, was
set upon the hobbit’s head.

“I feel magnificent,” he thought; “but I expect
I look rather absurd. How they would laugh on
the Hill at home! Still I wish there was a looking-
glass handy!”

All the same Mr. Baggins kept his head
more clear of the bewitchment of the hoard than
the dwarves did. Long before the dwarves were
tired of examining the treasures, he became
weary of it and sat down on the floor; and he
began to wonder nervously what the end of it all
would be. “I would give a good many of these
precious goblets,” he thought, “for a drink of
something cheering out of one of Beorn’s
wooden bowls!”

“Thorin!” he cried aloud. “What next? We
are armed, but what good has any armour ever
been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This
treasure is not yet won back. We are not
looking for gold yet, but for a way of escape;
and we have tempted luck too long!”

“You speak the truth!” answered Thorin,
recovering his wits. “Let us go! I will guide you.
Not in a thousand years should I forget the ways
of this palace.” Then he hailed the others, and
they gathered together, and holding their
torches above their heads they passed through
the gaping doors, not without many a backward
glance of longing.

Their glittering mail they had covered again
with their old cloaks and their bright helms with
their tattered hoods, and one by one they
walked behind Thorin, a line of little lights in the
darkness that halted often, listening in fear once
more for any rumour of the dragon’s coming.

Though all the old adornments were long
mouldered or destroyed, and though all was
befouled and blasted with the comings and
goings of the monster, Thorin knew every
passage and every turn. They climbed long
stairs, and turned and went down wide echoing
ways, and turned again and climbed yet more
stairs, and yet more stairs again. These were
smooth, cut out of the living rock broad and fair;
and up, up, the dwarves went, and they met no
sign of any living thing, only furtive shadows that
fled from the approach of their torches fluttering
in the draughts.

The steps were not made, all the same, for
hobbit-legs, and Bilbo was just feeling that he

could go on no longer, when suddenly the roof
sprang high and far beyond the reach of their
torch-light. A white glimmer could be seen
coming through some opening far above, and
the air smelt sweeter. Before them light came
dimly through great doors, that hung twisted on
their hinges and half burnt.

“This is the great chamber of Thror,” said
Thorin; “the hall of feasting and of council. Not
far off now is the Front Gate.”

They passed through the ruined chamber.
Tables were rotting there; chairs and benches
were lying there overturned, charred and
decaying. Skulls and bones were upon the floor
among flagons and bowls and broken drinking-
horns and dust. As they came through yet more
doors at the further end, a sound of water fell
upon their ears, and the grey light grew
suddenly more full.

“There is the birth of the Running River,”
said Thorin. “From here it hastens to the Gate.
Let us follow it!”

Out of a dark opening in a wall of rock there
issued a boiling water, and it flowed swirling in
a narrow channel, carved and made straight
and deep by the cunning of ancient hands.
Beside it ran a stone-paved road, wide enough
for many men abreast. Swiftly along this they
ran, and round a wide-sweeping turn — and

behold! before them stood the broad light of
day. In front there rose a tall arch, still showing
the fragments of old carven work within, worn
and splintered and blackened though it was. A
misty sun sent its pale light between the arms of
the Mountain, and beams of gold fell on the
pavement at the threshold.

A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by
their smoking torches flurried over them; as they
sprang forward their feet slithered on stones
rubbed smooth and slimed by the passing of
the dragon. Now before them the water fell
noisily outward and foamed down towards the
valley. They flung their pale torches to the
ground, and stood gazing out with dazzled
eyes. They were come to the Front Gate, and
were looking out upon Dale.

“Well!” said Bilbo, “I never expected to be
looking out of this door. And I never expected to
be so pleased to see the sun again, and to feel
the wind on my face. But, ow! this wind is cold!”

It was. A bitter easterly breeze blew with a
threat of oncoming winter. It swirled over and
round the arms of the Mountain into the valley,
and sighed among the rocks. After their long
time in the stewing depths of the dragon-
haunted caverns, they shivered in the sun.

Suddenly Bilbo realized that he was not only
tired but also very hungry indeed. “It seems to

be late morning,” he said, ‘‘and so I suppose it
is more or less breakfast-time — if there is any
breakfast to have. But I don’t feel that Smaug’s
front doorstep is the safest place for a meal. Do
let’s go somewhere where we can sit quiet for a
bit!”

“Quite right!” said Balin. “And I think I know
which way we should go: we ought to make for
the old look-out post at the South-West corner
of the Mountain.”

“How far is that?” asked the hobbit.

“Five hours march, I should think. It will be
rough going. The road from the Gate along the
left edge of the stream seems all broken up. But
look down there! The river loops suddenly east
across Dale in front of the ruined town. At that
point there was once a bridge, leading to steep
stairs that climbed up the right bank, and so to
a road running towards Ravenhill. There is (or
was) a path that left the road and climbed up to
the post. A hard climb, too, even if the old steps
are still there.”

“Dear me!” grumbled the hobbit. “More
walking and more climbing without breakfast! I
wonder how many breakfasts, and other meals,
we have missed inside that nasty clockless,
timeless hole?”

As a matter of fact two nights and the day
between had gone by (and not altogether

without food) since the dragon smashed the
magic door, but Bilbo had quite lost count, and
it might have been one night or a week of nights
for all he could tell.

“Come, come!” said Thorin laughing — his
spirits had begun to rise again, and he rattled
the precious stones in his pockets. “Don’t call
my palace a nasty hole! You wait till it has been
cleaned and redecorated!”

“That won’t be till Smaug’s dead,” said
Bilbo glumly. “In the meanwhile where is he? I
would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he
is not up on the Mountain looking down at us!”

That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily,
and they quickly decided that Bilbo and Balin
were right.

“We must move away from here,” said Dori.
“I feel as if his eyes were on the back of my
head.”

“It’s a cold lonesome place,” said Bombur.
“There may be drink, but I see no sign of food.
A dragon would always be hungry in such
parts.”

“Come on! Come on!” cried the others. “Let
us follow Balin’s path!”

Under the rocky wall to the right there was no

path, so on they trudged among the stones on
the left side of the river, and the emptiness and
desolation soon sobered even Thorin again.
The bridge that Balin had spoken of they found
long fallen, and most of its stones were now
only boulders in the shallow noisy stream; but
they forded the water without much difficulty,
and found the ancient steps, and climbed the
high bank. After going a short way they struck
the old road, and before long came to a deep
dell sheltered among the rocks; there they
rested for a while and had such a breakfast as
they could, chiefly cram and water. (If you want
to know what cram is, I can only say that I don’t
know the recipe; but it is biscuitish, keeps good
indefinitely, is supposed to be sustaining, and
is certainly not entertaining, being in fact very
uninteresting except as a chewing exercise. It
was made by the Lake-men for long journeys.)

After that they went on again; and now the
road struck westwards and left the river, and the
great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-
spur drew ever nearer. At length they reached
the hill path. It scrambled steeply up, and they
plodded slowly one behind the other, till at last
in the late afternoon they came to the top of the
ridqe and saw the wintry sun qoinq downwards
to the West.

Here they found a flat place without a wall

on three sides, but backed to the North by a
rocky face in which there was an opening like a
door. From that door there was a wide view
East and South and West.

“Here,” said Balin, “in the old days we used
always to keep watchmen, and that door behind
leads into a rockhewn chamber that was made
here as a guardroom. There were several
places like it round the Mountain. But there
seemed small need for watching in the days of
our prosperity, and the guards were made over
comfortable, perhaps — otherwise we might
have had longer warning of the coming of the
dragon, and things might have been different.
Still, here we can now lie hid and sheltered for a
while, and can see much without being seen.”

"Not much use, if we have been seen
coming here,” said Dori, who was always
looking up towards the Mountain’s peak, as if
he expected to see Smaug perched there like a
bird on a steeple.

“We must take our chance of that,” said
Thorin. “We can go no further to-day.”

“Hear, hear!” cried Bilbo, and flung himself
on the ground.

In the rock-chamber there would have been
room for a hundred, and there was a small
chamber further in, more removed from the cold
outside. It was quite deserted; not even wild

animals seemed to have used it in all the days
of Smaug’s dominion. There they laid their
burdens; and some threw themselves down at
once and slept, but the others sat near the outer
door and discussed their plans. In all their talk
they came perpetually back to one thing: where
was Smaug? They looked West and there was
nothing, and East there was nothing, and in the
South there was no sign of the dragon, but there
was a gathering of very many birds. At that they
gazed and wondered; but they were no nearer
understanding it, when the first cold stars came
out.

Chapter XIV

FIRE AND WATER

Now if you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news
of Smaug, you must go back again to the
evening when he smashed the door and flew off
in rage, two days before.

The men of the lake-town Esgaroth were
mostly indoors, for the breeze was from the
black East and chill, but a few were walking on
the quays, and watching, as they were fond of
doing, the stars shine out from the smooth
patches of the lake as they opened in the sky.
From their town the Lonely Mountain was mostly
screened by the low hills at the far end of the
lake, through a gap in which the Running River
came down from the North. Only its high peak
could they see in clear weather, and they
looked seldom at it, for it was ominous and
drear even in the light of morning. Now it was
lost and gone, blotted in the dark.

Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief

glow touched it and faded.

“Look!” said one. “The lights again! Last
night the watchmen saw them start and fade
from midnight until dawn. Something is
happening up there.”

“Perhaps the King under the Mountain is
forging gold,” said another. “It is long since he
went North. It is time the songs began to prove
themselves again.”

“Which king?” said another with a grim
voice. “As like as not it is the marauding fire of
the Dragon, the only king under the Mountain
we have ever known.”

“You are always foreboding gloomy things!”
said the others. “Anything from floods to
poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!”

Then suddenly a great light appeared in the
low place in the hills and the northern end of the
lake turned golden. “The King beneath the
Mountain!” they shouted. “His wealth is like the
Sun, his silver like a fountain, his rivers golden
run! The river is running gold from the
Mountain!” they cried, and everywhere windows
were opening and feet were hurrying.

There was once more a tremendous
excitement and enthusiasm. But the grim-
voiced fellow ran hotfoot to the Master. “The
dragon is coming or I am a fool!” he cried. “Cut
the bridges! To arms! To arms!”

Then warning trumpets were suddenly
sounded, and echoed along the rocky shores.
The cheering stopped and the joy was turned to
dread. So it was that the dragon did not find
them quite unprepared.

Before long, so great was his speed, they
could see him as a spark of fire rushing
towards them and growing ever huger and
more bright, and not the most foolish doubted
that the prophecies had gone rather wrong. Still
they had a little time. Every vessel in the town
was filled with water, every warrior was armed,
every arrow and dart was ready, and the bridge
to the land was thrown down and destroyed,
before the roar of Smaug’s terrible approach
grew loud, and the lake rippled red as fire
beneath the awful beating of his wings.

Amid shrieks and wailing and the shouts of
men he came over them, swept towards the
bridges and was foiled! The bridge was gone,
and his enemies were on an island in deep
water — too deep and dark and cool for his
liking. If he plunged into it, a vapour and a
steam would arise enough to cover all the land
with a mist for days; but the lake was mightier
than he, it would quench him before he could
pass through.

Roaring he swept back over the town. A hail
of dark arrows leaped up and snapped and

rattled on his scales and jewels, and their shafts
fell back kindled by his breath burning and
hissing into the lake. No fireworks you ever
imagined equalled the sights that night. At the
twanging of the bows and the shrilling of the
trumpets the dragon’s wrath blazed to its height,
till he was blind and mad with it. No one had
dared to give battle to him for many an age; nor
would they have dared now, if it had not been
for the grim-voiced man (Bard was his name),
who ran to and fro cheering on the archers and
urging the Master to order them to fight to the
last arrow.

Fire leaped from the dragon’s jaws. He
circled for a while high in the air above them
lighting all the lake; the trees by the shores
shone like copper and like blood with leaping
shadows of dense black at their feet. Then
down he swooped straight through the arrow-
storm, reckless in his rage, taking no heed to
turn his scaly sides towards his foes, seeking
only to set their town ablaze.

Fire leaped from thatched roofs and
wooden beam-ends as he hurtled down and
past and round again, though all had been
drenched with water before he came. Once
more water was flung by a hundred hands
wherever a spark appeared. Back swirled the
dragon. A sweep of his tail and the roof of the

Great House crumbled and smashed down.
Flames unquenchable sprang high into the
night. Another swoop and another, and another
house and then another sprang afire and fell;
and still no arrow hindered Smaug or hurt him
more than a fly from the marshes.

Already men were jumping into the water on
every side. Women and children were being
huddled into laden boats in the market-pool.
Weapons were flung down. There was
mourning and weeping, where but a little time
ago the old songs of mirth to come had been
sung about the dwarves. Now men cursed their
names. The Master himself was turning to his
great gilded boat, hoping to row away in the
confusion and save himself. Soon all the town
would be deserted and burned down to the
surface of the lake.

That was the dragon’s hope. They could all
get into boats for all he cared. There he could
have fine sport hunting them, or they could stop
till they starved. Let them try to get to land and
he would be ready. Soon he would set all the
shoreland woods ablaze and wither every field
and pasture. Just now he was enjoying the sport
of town-baiting more than he had enjoyed

anything for years.

But there was still a company of archers
that held their ground among the burning
houses. Their captain was Bard, grim-voiced
and grim-faced, whose friends had accused
him of prophesying floods and poisoned fish,
though they knew his worth and courage. He
was a descendant in long line of Girion, Lord of
Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down
the Running River from the ruin long ago. Now
he shot with a great yew bow, till all his arrows
but one were spent. The flames were near him.
His companions were leaving him. He bent his
bow for the last time.

S ud d e nly o ut of the d a rk so methi ng fl utte red
to his shoulder. He started — but it was only an
old thrush. Unafraid it perched by his ear and it
brought him news. Marvelling he found he could
understand its tongue, for he was of the race of
Dale.

“Wait! Wait!” it said to him. “The moon is
rising. Look for the hollow of the left breast as
he flies and turns above you!” And while Bard
paused in wonder it told him of tidings up in the
Mountain and of all that it had heard.

Then Bard drew his bow-string to his ear.
The dragon was circling back, flying low, and as
he came the moon rose above the eastern
shore and silvered his great wings.

“Arrow!” said the bowman. “Black arrow! I
have saved you to the last. You have never
failed me and always I have recovered you. I
had you from my father and he from of old. If
ever you came from the forges of the true king
under the Mountain, go nowand speed well!”

The dragon swooped once more lower than
ever, and as he turned and dived down his belly
glittered white with sparkling fires of gems in
the moon — but not in one place. The great bow
twanged. The black arrow sped straight from
the string, straight for the hollow by the left
breast where the foreleg was flung wide. In it
smote and vanished, barb, shaft and feather, so
fierce was its flight. With a shriek that deafened
men, felled trees and split stone, Smaug shot
spouting into the air, turned over and crashed
down from on high in ruin.

Full on the town he fell. His last throes
splintered it to sparks and gledes. The lake
roared in. A vast steam leaped up, white in the
sudden dark under the moon. There was a hiss,
a gushing whirl, and then silence. And that was
the end of Smaug and Esgaroth, but not of
Bard.

The waxing moon rose higher and higher and

the wind grew loud and cold. It twisted the white
fog into bending pillars and hurrying clouds and
drove it off to the West to scatter in tattered
shreds over the marshes before Mirkwood.
Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark
on the surface of the lake, and down the wind
came the voices of the people of Esgaroth
lamenting their lost town and goods and ruined
houses. But they had really much to be thankful
for, had they thought of it, though it could hardly
be expected that they should just then: three
quarters of the people of the town had at least
escaped alive; their woods and fields and
pastures and cattle and most of their boats
remained undamaged; and the dragon was
dead. What that meant they had not yet
realized.

They gathered in mournful crowds upon the
western shores, shivering in the cold wind, and
their first complaints and anger were against
the Master, who had left the town so soon, while
some were still willing to defend it.

“He may have a good head for business —
especially his own business,” some murmured,
“but he is no good when anything serious
happens!” And they praised the courage of
Bard and his last mighty shot. “If only he had not
been killed,” they all said, “we would make him
a king. Bard the Dragon-shooter of the line of

Girion! Alas that he is lost!”

And in the very midst of theirtalk a tall figure
stepped from the shadows. He was drenched
with water, his black hair hung wet over his face
and shoulders, and a fierce light was in his
eyes.

“Bard is not lost!” he cried. “He dived from
Esgaroth, when the enemy was slain. I am
Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the
dragon!”

“King Bard! King Bard!” they shouted; but
the Master ground his chattering teeth.

“Girion was lord of Dale, not king of
Esgaroth,” he said. “In the Lake-town we have
always elected masters from among the old
and wise, and have not endured the rule of
mere fighting men. Let ‘King Bard’ go back to
his own kingdom — Dale is now freed by his
valour, and nothing hinders his return. And any
that wish can go with him, if they prefer the cold
stones under the shadow of the Mountain to the
green shores of the lake. The wise will stay here
and hope to rebuild our town, and enjoy again in
time its peace and riches.”

“We will have King Bard!” the people near
at hand shouted in reply. “We have had enough
of the old men and the money-counters!” And
people further off took up the cry: “Up the
Bowman, and down with Moneybags,” till the

clamour echoed along the shore.

“I am the last man to undervalue Bard the
Bowman,” said the Master warily (for Bard now
stood close beside him). “He has tonight
earned an eminent place in the roll of the
benefactors of our town; and he is worthy of
many imperishable songs. But, why O
People?” — and here the Master rose to his feet
and spoke very loud and clear — “Why do I get
all your blame? For what fault am I to be
deposed? Who aroused the dragon from his
slumber, I might ask? Who obtained of us rich
gifts and ample help, and led us to believe that
old songs could come true? Who played on our
soft hearts and our pleasant fancies? What sort
of gold have they sent down the river to reward
us? Dragon-fire and ruin! From whom should
we claim the recompense of our damage, and
aid for our widows and orphans?”

As you see, the Master had not got his
position for nothing. The result of his words was
that for the moment the people quite forgot their
idea of a new king, and turned their angry
thoughts towards Thorin and his company. Wild
and bitter words were shouted from many
sides; and some of those who had before sung
the old songs loudest, were now heard as loudly
crying that the dwarves had stirred the dragon
up against them deliberately!

“Fools!” said Bard. “Why waste words and
wrath on those unhappy creatures? Doubtless
they perished first in fire, before Smaug came
to us.” Then even as he was speaking, the
thought came into his heart of the fabled
treasure of the Mountain lying without guard or
owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of
the Master’s words, and of Dale rebuilt, and
filled with golden bells, if he could but find the
men.

At length he spoke again: “This is no time
for angry words, Master, or for considering
weighty plans of change. There is work to do. I
serve you still — though after a while I may think
again of your words and go North with any that
will follow me.”

Then he strode off to help in the ordering of
the camps and in the care of the sick and the
wounded. But the Master scowled at his back
as he went, and remained sitting on the ground.
He thought much but said little, unless it was to
call loudly for men to bring him fire and food.

Now everywhere Bard went he found talk
running like fire among the people concerning
the vast treasure that was now unguarded. Men
spoke of the recompense for all their harm that
they would soon get from it, and wealth over
and to spare with which to buy rich things from
the South; and it cheered them greatly in their

plight. That was as well, for the night was bitter
and miserable. Shelters could be contrived for
few (the Master had one) and there was little
food (even the Master went short). Many took ill
of wet and cold and sorrow that night, and
afterwards died, who had escaped uninjured
from the ruin of the town; and in the days that
followed there was much sickness and great
hunger.

Meanwhile Bard took the lead, and ordered
things as he wished, though always in the
Master’s name, and he had a hard task to
govern the people and direct the preparations
for their protection and housing. Probably most
of them would have perished in the winter that
now hurried after autumn, if help had not been
to hand. But help came swiftly; for Bard at once
had speedy messengers sent up the river to the
Forest to ask the aid of the King of the Elves of
the Wood, and these messengers had found a
host already on the move, although it was then
only the third day after the fall of Smaug.

The Elvenking had received news from his
own messengers and from the birds that loved
his folk, and already knew much of what had
happened. Very great indeed was the
commotion among all things with wings that
dwelt on the borders of the Desolation of the
Dragon. The air was filled with circling flocks,

and their swift-flying messengers flew here and
there across the sky. Above the borders of the
Forest there was whistling, crying and piping.
Far over Mirkwood tidings spread: “Smaug is
dead!” Leaves rustled and startled ears were
lifted. Even before the Elvenking rode forth the
news had passed west right to the pinewoods
of the Misty Mountains; Beorn had heard it in
his wooden house, and the goblins were at
council in their caves.

“That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin
Oakenshield, I fear,” said the king. “He would
have done better to have remained my guest. It
is an ill wind, all the same,” he added, “that
blows no one any good.” For he too had not
forgotten the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it
was that Bard’s messengers found him now
marching with many spearmen and bowmen;
and crows were gathered thick above him, for
they thought that war was awakening again,
such as had not been in those parts for a long
age.

But the king, when he received the prayers
of Bard, had pity, for he was the lord of a good
and kindly people; so turning his march, which
had at first been direct towards the Mountain,
he hastened now down the river to the Long
Lake. He had not boats or rafts enough for his
host, and they were forced to go the slower way

by foot; but great store of goods he sent ahead
by water. Still elves are light-footed, and though
they were not in these days much used to the
marches and the treacherous lands between
the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift.
Only five days after the death of the dragon they
came upon the shores and looked on the ruins
of the town. Their welcome was good, as may
be expected, and the men and their Master
were ready to make any bargain for the future in
return for the Elvenking’s aid.

Their plans were soon made. With the
women and the children, the old and the unfit,
the Master remained behind; and with him were
some men of crafts and many skilled elves; and
they busied themselves felling trees, and
collecting the timber sent down from the Forest.
Then they set about raising many huts by the
shore against the oncoming winter; and also
under the Master’s direction they began the
planning of a new town, designed more fair and
large even than before, but not in the same
place. They removed northward higher up the
shore; for ever after they had a dread of the
water where the dragon lay. He would never
again return to his golden bed, but was
stretched cold as stone, twisted upon the floor
of the shallows. There for ages his huge bones
could be seen in calm weather amid the ruined

piles of the old town. But few dared to cross the
cursed spot, and none dared to dive into the
shivering water or recover the precious stones
that fell from his rotting carcase.

But all the men of arms who were still able,
and the most of the Elvenking’s array, got ready
to march north to the Mountain. It was thus that
in eleven days from the ruin of the town the
head of their host passed the rock-gates at the
end of the lake and came into the desolate
lands.

Chapter XV

THE GATHERING OF THE

CLOUDS

Now we will return to Bilbo and the dwarves. All
night one of them had watched, but when
morning came they had not heard or seen any
sign of danger. But ever more thickly the birds
were gathering. Their companies came flying
from the South; and the crows that still lived
about the Mountain were wheeling and crying
unceasingly above.

“Something strange is happening,” said
Thorin. “The time has gone for the autumn
wanderings; and these are birds that dwell
always in the land; there are starlings and flocks
of finches; and far off there are many carrion
birds as if a battle were afoot!”

Suddenly Bilbo pointed: “There is that old
thrush again!” he cried. “He seems to have
escaped, when Smaug smashed the mountain-
side, but I don’t suppose the snails have!”

Sure enough the old thrush was there, and
as Bilbo pointed, he flew towards them and
perched on a stone near by. Then he fluttered
his wings and sang; then he cocked his head
on one side, as if to listen; and again he sang,
and again he listened.

“I believe he is trying to tell us something,”
said Balin; ‘‘but I cannot follow the speech of
such birds, it is very quick and difficult. Can you
make it out Baggins?”

"Not very well,” said Bilbo (as a matter of
fact, he could make nothing of it at all); “but the
old fellow seems very excited.”

“I only wish he was a raven!” said Balin.

“I thought you did not like them! You
seemed very shy of them, when we came this
way before.”

“Those were crows! And nasty suspicious-
looking creatures at that, and rude as well. You
must have heard the ugly names they were
calling after us. But the ravens are different.
There used to be great friendship between
them and the people of Thror; and they often
brought us secret news, and were rewarded
with such bright things as they coveted to hide
in their dwellings.

“They live many a year, and their memories
are long, and they hand on their wisdom to their
children. I knew many among the ravens of the

rocks when I was a dwarf-lad. This very height
was once named Ravenhill, because there was
a wise and famous pair, old Care and his wife,
that lived here above the guard-chamber. But I
don’t suppose that any of that ancient breed
linger here now.”

No sooner had he finished speaking than
the old thrush gave a loud call, and immediately
flew away.

“We may not understand him, but that old
bird understands us, I am sure,” said Balin.
“Keep watch now, and see what happens!”

Before long there was a fluttering of wings,
and back came the thrush; and with him came a
most decrepit old bird. He was getting blind, he
could hardly fly, and the top of his head was
bald. He was an aged raven of great size. He
alighted stiffly on the ground before them, slowly
flapped his wings, and bobbed towards Thorin.

“O Thorin son of Thrain, and Balin son of
Fundin,” he croaked (and Bilbo could
understand what he said, for he used ordinary
language and not bird-speech). “I am Roac son
of Care. Care is dead, but he was well known to
you once. It is a hundred years and three and
fifty since I came out of the egg, but I do not
forget what my father told me. Now I am the
chief of the great ravens of the Mountain. We
are few, but we remember still the king that was

of old. Most of my people are abroad, for there
are great tidings in the South — some are
tidings of joy to you, and some you will not think
so good.

“Behold! the birds are gathering back again
to the Mountain and to Dale from South and
East and West, for word has gone out that
Smaug is dead!”

“Dead! Dead?” shouted the dwarves.
“Dead! Then we have been in needless fear —
and the treasure is ours!” They all sprang up
and began to caper about for joy.

“Yes, dead,” said Roac. “The thrush, may
his feathers never fall, saw him die, and we may
trust his words. He saw him fall in battle with the
men of Esgaroth the third night back from now
at the rising of the moon.”

It was some time before Thorin could bring
the dwarves to be silent and listen to the raven’s
news. At length when he had told all the tale of
the battle he went on:

“So much for joy, Thorin Oakenshield. You
may go back to your halls in safety; all the
treasure is yours — for the moment. But many
are gathering hither beside the birds. The news
of the death of the guardian has already gone
far and wide, and the legend of the wealth of
Thror has not lost in the telling during many
years; many are eager for a share of the spoil.

Already a host of the elves is on the way, and
carrion birds are with them hoping for battle and
slaughter. By the lake men murmur that their
sorrows are due to the dwarves; for they are
homeless and many have died, and Smaug has
destroyed their town. They too think to find
amends from your treasure, whether you are
alive or dead.

“Your own wisdom must decide your
course; but thirteen is small remnant of the
great folk of Durin that once dwelt here, and
now are scattered far. If you will listen to my
counsel, you will not trust the Master of the
Lake-men, but rather him that shot the dragon
with his bow. Bard is he, of the race of Dale, of
the line of Girion; he is a grim man but true. We
would see peace once more among dwarves
and men and elves after the long desolation; but
it may cost you dear in gold. I have spoken.”

Then Thorin burst forth in anger: “Our
thanks, Roac Care’s son. You and your people
shall not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall
thieves take or the violent carry off while we are
alive. If you would earn our thanks still more,
bring us news of any that draw near. Also I
would beg of you, if any of you are still young
and strong of wing, that you would send
messengers to our kin in the mountains of the
North, both west from here and east, and tell

them of our plight. But go specially to my cousin
Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people
well-armed, and dwells nearest to this place.
Bid him hasten!”

“I will not say if this counsel be good or
bad,” croaked Roac, “but I will do what can be
done.” Then off he slowly flew.

“Back now to the Mountain!” cried Thorin.
“We have little time to lose.”

“And little food to use!” cried Bilbo, always
practical on such points. In any case he felt that
the adventure was, properly speaking, over with
the death of the dragon — in which he was much
mistaken — and he would have given most of his
share of the profits for the peaceful winding up
of these affairs.

“Back to the Mountain!” cried the dwarves
as if they had not heard him; so back he had to
go with them.

As you have heard some of the events already,
you will see that the dwarves still had some
days before them. They explored the caverns
once more, and found, as they expected, that
only the Front Gate remained open; all the other
gates (except, of course, the small secret door)
had long ago been broken and blocked by

Smaug, and no sign of them remained. So now
they began to labour hard in fortifying the main
entrance, and in making a new path that led
from it. Tools were to be found in plenty that the
miners and quarriers and builders of old had
used; and at such work the dwarves were still
very skilled.

As they worked the ravens brought them
constant tidings. In this way they learned that the
Elvenking had turned aside to the Lake, and
they still had a breathing space. Better still, they
heard that three of their ponies had escaped
and were wandering wild far down the banks of
the Running River, not far from where the rest of
their stores had been left. So while the others
went on with their work, Fili and Kili were sent,
guided by a raven, to find the ponies and bring
back all they could.

They were four days gone, and by that time
they knew that the joined armies of the Lake-
men and the Elves were hurrying toward the
Mountain. But now their hopes were higher; for
they had food for some weeks with care —
chiefly cram, of course, and they were very tired
of it; but cram is much better than nothing — and
already the gate was blocked with a wall of
squared stones laid dry, but very thick and high,
across the opening. There were holes in the
wall through which they could see (or shoot), but

no entrance. They climbed in or out with
ladders, and hauled stuff up with ropes. For the
issuing of the stream they had contrived a small
low arch under the new wall; but near the
entrance they had so altered the narrow bed
that a wide pool stretched from the mountain-
wall to the head of the fall over which the stream
went towards Dale. Approach to the Gate was
now only possible, without swimming, along a
narrow ledge of the cliff, to the right as one
looked outwards from the wall. The ponies they
had brought only to the head of the steps above
the old bridge, and unloading them there had
bidden them return to their masters and sent
them back riderless to the South.

There came a night when suddenly there were
many lights as of fires and torches away south
in Dale before them.

“They have come!” called Balin. “And their
camp is very great. They must have come into
the valley under the cover of dusk along both
banks of the river.”

That night the dwarves slept little. The
morning was still pale when they saw a
company approaching. From behind their wall
they watched them come up to the valley’s head

and climb slowly up. Before long they could see
that both men of the lake armed as if for war
and elvish bowmen were among them. At length
the foremost of these climbed the tumbled
rocks and appeared at the top of the falls; and
very great was their surprise to see the pool
before them and the Gate blocked with a wall of
new-hewn stone.

As they stood pointing and speaking to one
another Thorin hailed them: “Who are you,” he
called in a very loud voice, “that come as if in
war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King
under the Mountain, and what do you desire?”

But they answered nothing. Some turned
swiftly back, and the others after gazing for a
while at the Gate and its defences soon
followed them. That day the camp was moved
to the east of the river, right between the arms
of the Mountain. The rocks echoed then with
voices and with song, as they had not done for
many a day. There was the sound, too, of elven-
harps and of sweet music; and as it echoed up
towards them it seemed that the chill of the air
was warmed, and they caught faintly the
fragrance of woodland flowers blossoming in
spring.

Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark
fortress and to go down and join in the mirth
and feasting by the fires. Some of the younger

dwarves were moved in their hearts, too, and
they muttered that they wished things had fallen
out otherwise and that they might welcome such
folk as friends; but Thorin scowled.

Then the dwarves themselves brought forth
harps and instruments regained from the hoard,
and made music to soften his mood; but their
song was not as elvish song, and was much like
the song they had sung long before in Bilbo’s
little hobbit-hole.

Under the Mountain dark and tall
The King has come unto his hall!
His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread,
And ever so his foes shall fall.

The sword is sharp, the spear is long,
The arrow swift, the Gate is strong;

The heart is bold that looks on gold;

The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong.

The dwarves of yore made mighty spells,
While hammers fell like ringing bells

In places deep, where dark things sleep,
In hollowhalls beneath the fells.

On silver necklaces they strung
The light of stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, from twisted wire
The melody of harps they wrung.

The mountain throne once more is freed!
O! wandering folk, the summons heed!
Come haste! Come haste! across the
waste!

The king of friend and kin has need.

Now cal I we over mountains cold,
‘Come back unto the caverns old’!
Here at the Gates the king awaits,

His hands are rich with gems and gold.

The king is come unto his hall
Under the Mountain dark and tall.

The Worm of Dread is slain and dead,
And ever so our foes shall fall!

This song appeared to please Thorin, and
he smiled again and grew merry; and he began
reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how
long it would be before Dain could reach the
Lonely Mountain, if he had set out as soon as
the message reached him. But Bilbo’s heart
fell, both at the song and the talk: they sounded
much too warlike.

The next morning early a company of
spearmen was seen crossing the river, and
marching up the valley. They bore with them the
green banner of the Elvenking and the blue
banner of the Lake, and they advanced until
they stood right before the wall at the Gate.

Again Thorin hailed them in a loud voice:
“Who are you that come armed for war to the
gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the
Mountain?” This time he was answered.

A tall man stood forward, dark of hair and
grim of face, and he cried: “Hail Thorin! Why do
you fence yourself like a robber in his hold? We
are not yet foes, and we rejoice that you are
alive beyond our hope. We came expecting to

find none living here; yet now that we are met
there is matter for a parley and a council.”

“Who are you, and of what would you
parley?”

“I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon
slain and your treasure delivered. Is that not a
matter that concerns you? Moreover I am by
right descent the heir of Girion of Dale, and in
your hoard is mingled much of the wealth of his
halls and towns, which of old Smaug stole. Is
not that a matter of which we may speak?
Further in his last battle Smaug destroyed the
dwellings of the men of Esgaroth, and I am yet
the servant of their Master. I would speak for
him and ask whether you have no thought for
the sorrow and misery of his people. They
aided you in your distress, and in recompense
you have thus far brought ruin only, though
doubtless undesigned.”

Now these were fair words and true, if
proudly and grimly spoken; and Bilbo thought
that Thorin would at once admit what justice
was in them. He did not, of course, expect that
any one would remember that it was he who
discovered all by himself the dragon’s weak
spot; and that was just as well, for no one ever
did. But also he did not reckon with the power
that gold has upon which a dragon has long
brooded, nor with dwarvish hearts. Long hours

in the past days Thorin had spent in the
treasury, and the lust of it was heavy on him.
Though he had hunted chiefly for the
Arkenstone, yet he had an eye for many another
wonderful thing that was lying there, about which
were wound old memories of the labours and
the sorrows of his race.

“You put your worst cause last and in the
chief place,” Thorin answered. “To the treasure
of my people no man has a claim, because
Smaug who stole it from us also robbed him of
life or home. The treasure was not his that his
evil deeds should be amended with a share of
it. The price of the goods and the assistance
that we received of the Lake-men we will fairly
pay — in due time. But nothing will we give, not
even a loafs worth, under threat offeree. While
an armed host lies before our doors, we look on
you as foes and thieves.

“It is in my mind to ask what share of their
inheritance you would have paid to our kindred,
had you found the hoard unguarded and us
slain.”

“A just question,” replied Bard. “But you are
not dead, and we are not robbers. Moreover the
wealthy may have pity beyond right on the
needy that befriended them when they were in
want. And still my other claims remain

unanswered.”

“I will not parley, as I have said, with armed
men at my gate. Nor at all with the people of the
Elvenking, whom I remember with small
kindness. In this debate they have no place.
Begone now ere our arrows fly! And if you
would speak with me again, first dismiss the
elvish host to the woods where it belongs, and
then return, laying down your arms before you
approach the threshold.”

“The Elvenking is my friend, and he has
succoured the people of the Lake in their need,
though they had no claim but friendship on him,”
answered Bard. “We will give you time to repent
your words. Gather your wisdom ere we return!”
Then he departed and went back to the camp.

Ere many hours were past, the banner-
bearers returned, and trumpeters stood forth
and blew a blast:

“In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,”
one cried, “we speak unto Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, calling himself the King under the
Mountain, and we bid him consider well the
claims that have been urged, or be declared
our foe. At the least he shall deliver one twelfth
portion of the treasure unto Bard, as the
dragon-slayer, and as the heir of Girion. From
that portion Bard will himself contribute to the
aid of Esgaroth; but if Thorin would have the

friendship and honour of the lands about, as his
sires had of old, then he will give also
somewhat of his own for the comfort of the men
of the Lake.”

Then Thorin seized a bow of horn and shot
an arrow at the speaker. It smote into his shield
and stuck there quivering.

“Since such is your answer,” he called in
return, “I declare the Mountain besieged. You
shall not depart from it, until you call on your
side for a truce and a parley. We will bear no
weapons against you, but we leave you to your
gold. You may eat that, if you will!”

With that the messengers departed swiftly,
and the dwarves were left to consider their
case. So grim had Thorin become, that even if
they had wished, the others would not have
dared to find fault with him; but indeed most of
them seemed to share his mind — except
perhaps old fat Bomburand Fili and Kili. Bilbo,
of course, disapproved of the whole turn of
affairs. He had by now had more than enough of
the Mountain, and being besieged inside it was
not at all to his taste.

“The whole place still stinks of dragon,” he
grumbled to himself, “and it makes me sick.
And cram is beginning simply to stick in my
throat.”

Chapter XVI

A THIEF IN THE NIGHT

Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many
of the dwarves spent their time piling and
ordering the treasure; and now Thorin spoke of
the Arkenstone of Thrain, and bade them
eagerly to look for it in every corner.

“For the Arkenstone of my father,” he said,
“is worth more than a river of gold in itself, and
to me it is beyond price. That stone of all the
treasure I name unto myself, and I will be
avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds
it.”

Bilbo heard these words and he grew
afraid, wondering what would happen, if the
stone was found — wrapped in an old bundle of
tattered oddments that he used as a pillow. All
the same he did not speak of it, for as the
weariness of the days grew heavier, the
beginnings of a plan had come into his little
head.

Things had gone on like this for some time,
when the ravens brought news that Dain and
more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from
the Iron Hills, were now within about two days’
march of Dale, coming from the North-East.

“But they cannot reach the Mountain
unmarked,” said Roac, “and I fear lest there be
battle in the valley. I do not call this counsel
good. Though they are a grim folk, they are not
likely to overcome the host that besets you; and
even if they did so, what will you gain? Winter
and snow is hastening behind them. How shall
you be fed without the friendship and goodwill
of the lands about you? The treasure is likely to
be your death, though the dragon is no more!”

But Thorin was not moved. “Winter and
snow will bite both men and elves,” he said,
“and they may find their dwelling in the waste
grievous to bear. With my friends behind them
and winter upon them, they will perhaps be in
softer mood to parley with.”

That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky
was black and moonless. As soon as it was full
dark, he went to a corner of an inner chamber
just within the gate and drew from his bundle a
rope, and also the Arkenstone wrapped in a
rag. Then he climbed to the top of the wall. Only
Bombur was there, for it was his turn to watch,
and the dwarves kept only one watchman at a

time.

“It is mighty cold!” said Bombur. “I wish we
could have a fire up here as they have in the
camp!”

“It is warm enough inside,” said Bilbo.

“I daresay; but I am bound here till
midnight,” grumbled the fat dwarf. “A sorry
business altogether. Not that I venture to
disagree with Thorin, may his beard grow ever
longer; yet he was ever a dwarf with a stiff
neck.”

"Not as stiff as my legs,” said Bilbo. “I am
tired of stairs and stone passages. I would give
a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes.”

“I would give a good deal for the feel of a
strong drink in my throat, and for a soft bed after
a good supper!”

“I can’t give you those, while the siege is
going on. But it is long since I watched, and I will
take your turn for you, if you like. There is no
sleep in me tonight.”

“You are a good fellow, Mr. Baggins, and I
will take your offer kindly. If there should be
anything to note, rouse me first, mind you! I will
lie in the inner chamber to the left, not far away.”

“Off you go!” said Bilbo. “I will wake you at
midnight, and you can wake the next
watchman.”

As soon as Bombur had gone, Bilbo put on

his ring, fastened his rope, slipped down over
the wall, and was gone. He had about five hours
before him. Bombur would sleep (he could
sleep at any time, and ever since the adventure
in the forest he was always trying to recapture
the beautiful dreams he had then); and all the
others were busy with Thorin. It was unlikely that
any, even Fili or Kili, would come out on the wall
until it was their turn.

It was very dark, and the road after a while,
when he left the newly made path and climbed
down towards the lower course of the stream,
was strange to him. At last he came to the bend
where he had to cross the water, if he was to
make for the camp, as he wished. The bed of
the stream was there shallow but already broad,
and fording it in the dark was not easy for the
little hobbit. He was nearly across when he
missed his footing on a round stone and fell into
the cold water with a splash. He had barely
scrambled out on the far bank, shivering and
spluttering, when up came elves in the gloom
with bright lanterns and searched for the cause
of the noise.

“That was no fish!” one said. “There is a spy
about. Hide your lights! They will help him more
than us, if it is that queer little creature that is
said to be their servant.”

“Servant, indeed!” snorted Bilbo; and in the

middle of his snort he sneezed loudly, and the
elves immediately gathered towards the sound.

“Let’s have a light!” he said. “I am here, if
you want me!” and he slipped off his ring, and
popped from behind a rock.

They seized him quickly, in spite of their
surprise. “Who are you? Are you the dwarves’
hobbit? What are you doing? How did you get
so far past our sentinels?” they asked one after
another.

“I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,” he answered,
“companion of Thorin, if you want to know. I
know your king well by sight, though perhaps he
doesn’t know me to look at. But Bard will
remember me, and it is Bard I particularly want
to see.”

“Indeed!” said they, “and what may be your
business?”

“Whatever it is, it’s my own, my good elves.
But if you wish ever to get back to your own
woods from this cold cheerless place,” he
answered shivering, “you will take me along
quick to a fire, where I can dry — and then you
will let me speak to your chiefs as quick as may
be. I have only an hour or two to spare.”

That is how it came about that some two hours

after his escape from the Gate, Bilbo was
sitting beside a warm fire in front of a large tent,
and there sat too, gazing curiously at him, both
the Elvenking and Bard. A hobbit in elvish
armour, partly wrapped in an old blanket, was
something new to them.

“Really you know,” Bilbo was saying in his
best business manner, “things are impossible.
Personally I am tired of the whole affair. I wish I
was back in the West in my own home, where
folk are more reasonable. But I have an interest
in this matter — one fourteenth share, to be
precise, according to a letter, which fortunately I
believe I have kept.” He drew from a pocket in
his old jacket (which he still wore over his mail),
crumpled and much folded, Thorin’s letter that
had been put under the clock on his
mantelpiece in May!

“A share in the profits, mind you,” he went
on. “I am aware of that. Personally I am only too
ready to consider all your claims carefully, and
deduct what is right from the total before putting
in my own claim. However you don’t know
Thorin Oakenshield as well as I do now. I
assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of
gold and starve, as long as you sit here.”

“Well, let him!” said Bard. “Such a fool
deserves to starve.”

“Quite so,” said Bilbo. “I see your point of

view. At the same time winter is coming on fast.
Before long you will be having snow and what
not, and supplies will be difficult — even for elves
I imagine. Also there will be other difficulties.
You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of
the Iron Hills?”

“We have, a long time ago; but what has he
got to do with us?” asked the king.

“I thought as much. I see I have some
information you have not got. Dain, I may tell
you, is now less than two days’ march off, and
has at least five hundred grim dwarves with him
— a good many of them have had experience in
the dreadful dwarf and goblin wars, of which you
have no doubt heard. When they arrive there
may be serious trouble.”

“Why do you tell us this? Are you betraying
your friends, or are you threatening us?” asked
Bard grimly.

“My dear Bard!” squeaked Bilbo. “Don’t be
so hasty! I never met such suspicious folk! I am
merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned.
Now I will make you an offer! !”

“Let us hear it!” they said.

“You may see it!” said he. “It is this!” and he
drew forth the Arkenstone, and threw away the
wrapping.

The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were
used to things of wonder and beauty, stood up

in amazement. Even Bard gazed marvelling at it
in silence. It was as if a globe had been filled
with moonlight and hung before them in a net
woven of the glint of frosty stars.

“This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,” said
Bilbo, “the Heart of the Mountain; and it is also
the heart of Thorin. He values it above a river of
gold. I give it to you. It will aid you in your
bargaining.” Then Bilbo, not without a shudder,
not without a glance of longing, handed the
marvellous stone to Bard, and he held it in his
hand, as though dazed.

“But how is it yours to give?” he asked at
last with an effort.

“O well!” said the hobbit uncomfortably. “It
isn’t exactly; but, well, I am willing to let it stand
against all my claim, don’t you know. I may be a
burglar — or so they say: personally I never really
felt like one — but I am an honest one, I hope,
more or less. Anyway I am going back now, and
the dwarves can do what they like to me. I hope
you will find it useful.”

The Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new
wonder. “Bilbo Baggins!” he said. “You are
more worthy to wear the armour of elf-princes
than many that have looked more comely in it.
But I wonder if Thorin Oakenshield will see it so.
I have more knowledge of dwarves in general
than you have perhaps. I advise you to remain

with us, and here you shall be honoured and
thrice welcome.”

“Thank you very much I am sure,” said Bilbo
with a bow. “But I don’t think I ought to leave my
friends like this, after all we have gone through
together. And I promised to wake old Bombur
at midnight, too! Really I must be going, and
quickly.”

Nothing they could say would stop him; so
an escort was provided for him, and as he went
both the king and Bard saluted him with honour.
As they passed through the camp an old man,
wrapped in a dark cloak, rose from a tent door
where he was sitting and came towards them.

“Well done! Mr. Baggins!” he said, clapping
Bilbo on the back. “There is always more about
you than anyone expects!” It was Gandalf.

For the first time for many a day Bilbo was
really delighted. But there was no time for all the
questions that he immediately wished to ask.

“All in good time!” said Gandalf. “Things are
drawing towards the end now, unless I am
mistaken. There is an unpleasant time just in
front of you; but keep your heart up! You may
come through all right. There is news brewing
that even the ravens have not heard. Good
night!”

Puzzled but cheered, Bilbo hurried on. He
was guided to a safe ford and set across dry,

and then he said farewell to the elves and
climbed carefully back towards the Gate. Great
weariness began to come over him; but it was
well before midnight when he clambered up the
rope again — it was still where he had left it. He
untied it and hid it, and then he sat down on the
wall and wondered anxiously what would
happen next.

At midnight he woke up Bombur; and then
in turn rolled himself up in his corner, without
listening to the old dwarfs thanks (which he felt
he had hardly earned). He was soon fast asleep
forgetting all his worries till the morning. As a
matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and
bacon.

Chapter XVII

THE CLOUDS BURST

Next day the trumpets rang early in the camp.
Soon a single runner was seen hurrying along
the narrow path. At a distance he stood and
hailed them, asking whether Thorin would now
listen to another embassy, since new tidings
had come to hand, and matters were changed.

“That will be Dain!” said Thorin when he
heard. “They will have got wind of his coming. I
thought that would alter their mood! Bid them
come few in number and weaponless, and I will
hear,” he called to the messenger.

About midday the banners of the Forest
and the Lake were seen to be borne forth
again. A company of twenty was approaching.
At the beginning of the narrow way they laid
aside sword and spear, and came on towards
the Gate. Wondering, the dwarves saw that
among them were both Bard and the Elvenking,
before whom an old man wrapped in cloak and

hood bore a strong casket of iron-bound wood.

“Hail Thorin!” said Bard. “Are you still of the
same mind?”

“My mind does not change with the rising
and setting of a few suns,” answered Thorin.
“Did you come to ask me idle questions? Still
the elf-host has not departed as I bade! Till then
you come in vain to bargain with me.”

“Is there then nothing for which you would
yield any of your gold?”

"Nothing that you or your friends have to
offer.”

“What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?” said
he, and at the same moment the old man
opened the casket and held aloft the jewel. The
light leapt from his hand, bright and white in the
morning.

Then Thorin was stricken dumb with
amazement and confusion. No one spoke for a
long while.

Thorin at length broke the silence, and his
voice was thick with wrath. “That stone was my
father’s, and is mine,” he said. “Why should I
purchase my own?” But wonder overcame him
and he added: “But how came you by the
heirloom of my house — if there is need to ask
such a question of thieves?”

“We are not thieves,” Bard answered. “Your
own we will give back in return for our own.”

“How came you by it?” shouted Thorin in
gathering rage.

“I gave it to them!” squeaked Bilbo, who
was peering over the wall, by now in a dreadful
fright.

“You! You!” cried Thorin, turning upon him
and grasping him with both hands. “You
miserable hobbit! You undersized — burglar!” he
shouted at a loss for words, and he shook poor
Bilbo like a rabbit.

“By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf
here! Curse him for his choice of you! May his
beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the
rocks!” he cried and lifted Bilbo in his arms.

“Stay! Your wish is granted!” said a voice.
The old man with the casket threw aside his
hood and cloak. “Here is Gandalf! And none too
soon it seems. If you don’t like my Burglar,
please don’t damage him. Put him down, and
listen first to what he has to say!”

“You all seem in league!” said Thorin
dropping Bilbo on the top of the wall. “Never
again will I have dealings with any wizard or his
friends. What have you to say, you descendant
of rats?”

“Dear me! Dear me!” said Bilbo. “I am sure
this is all very uncomfortable. You may
remember saying that I might choose my own
fourteenth share? Perhaps I took it too literally

— I have been told that dwarves are sometimes
politer in word than in deed. The time was, all
the same, when you seemed to think that I had
been of some service. Descendant of rats,
indeed! Is this all the service of you and your
family that I was promised, Thorin? Take it that I
have disposed of my share as I wished, and let
it go at that!”

“I will,” said Thorin grimly. “And I will let you
go at that — and may we never meet again!”
Then he turned and spoke over the wall. “I am
betrayed,” he said. “It was rightly guessed that I
could not forbear to redeem the Arkenstone, the
treasure of my house. For it I will give one
fourteenth share of the hoard in silver and gold,
setting aside the gems; but that shall be
accounted the promised share of this traitor,
and with that reward he shall depart, and you
can divide it as you will. He will get little enough,
I doubt not. Take him, if you wish him to live;
and no friendship of mine goes with him.

“Get down now to your friends!” he said to
Bilbo, “or I will throw you down.”

“What about the gold and silver?” asked
Bilbo.

“That shall follow after, as can be arranged,”
said he. “Get down!”

“Until then we keep the stone,” cried Bard.

“You are not making a very splendid figure

as King under the Mountain,” said Gandalf. “But
things may change yet.”

“They may indeed,” said Thorin. And
already, so strong was the bewilderment of the
treasure upon him, he was pondering whether
by the help of Dain he might not recapture the
Arkenstone and withhold the share of the
reward.

And so Bilbo was swung down from the
wall, and departed with nothing for all his
trouble, except the armour which Thorin had
given him already. More than one of the
dwarves in their hearts felt shame and pity at
his going.

“Farewell!” he cried to them. “We may meet
again as friends.”

“Be off!” called Thorin. “You have mail upon
you, which was made by my folk, and is too
good for you. It cannot be pierced by arrows;
but if you do not hasten, I will sting your
miserable feet. So be swift!”

"Not so hasty!” said Bard. “We will give you
until tomorrow. At noon we will return, and see if
you have brought from the hoard the portion that
is to be set against the stone. If that is done
without deceit, then we will depart, and the elf-
host will go back to the Forest. In the meanwhile
farewell!”

With that they went back to the camp; but

Thorin sent messengers by Roac telling Dain of
what had passed, and bidding him come with
wary speed.

That day passed and the night. The next day the
wind shifted west, and the air was dark and
gloomy. The morning was still early when a cry
was heard in the camp. Runners came in to
report that a host of dwarves had appeared
round the eastern spur of the Mountain and was
now hastening to Dale. Dain had come. He had
hurried on through the night, and so had come
upon them sooner than they had expected.
Each one of his folk was clad in a hauberk of
steel mail that hung to his knees, and his legs
were covered with hose of a fine and flexible
metal mesh, the secret of whose making was
possessed by Dain’s people. The dwarves are
exceedingly strong for their height, but most of
these were strong even for dwarves. In battle
they wielded heavy two-handed mattocks; but
each of them had also a short broad sword at
his side and a roundshield slung at his back.
Their beards were forked and plaited and thrust
into their belts. Their caps were of iron and they
were shod with iron, and their faces were grim.

Trumpets called men and elves to arms.

Before long the dwarves could be seen coming
up the valley at a great pace. They halted
between the river and the eastern spur; but a
few held on their way, and crossing the river
drew near the camp; and there they laid down
their weapons and held up their hands in sign of
peace. Bard went out to meet them, and with
him went Bilbo.

“We are sent from Dain son of Nain,” they
said when questioned. “We are hastening to
our kinsmen in the Mountain, since we learn that
the kingdom of old is renewed. But who are you
that sit in the plain as foes before defended
walls?” This, of course, in the polite and rather
old-fashioned language of such occasions,
meant simply: “You have no business here. We
are going on, so make way or we shall fight
you!” They meant to push on between the
Mountain and the loop of the river; for the
narrow land there did not seem to be strongly
guarded.

Bard, of course, refused to allow the
dwarves to go straight on to the Mountain. He
was determined to wait until the gold and silver
had been brought out in exchange for the
Arkenstone; for he did not believe that this
would be done, if once the fortress was manned
with so large and warlike a company. They had
brought with them a great store of supplies; for

the dwarves can carry very heavy burdens, and
nearly all of Dain’s folk, in spite of their rapid
march, bore huge packs on their backs in
addition to their weapons. They would stand a
siege for weeks, and by that time yet more
dwarves might come, and yet more, for Thorin
had many relatives. Also they would be able to
reopen and guard some other gate, so that the
besiegers would have to encircle the whole
mountain; and for that they had not sufficient
numbers.

These were, in fact, precisely their plans
(for the raven-messengers had been busy
between Thorin and Dain); but for the moment
the way was barred, so after angry words the
dwarf-messengers retired muttering in their
beards. Bard then sent messengers at once to
the Gate; but they found no gold or payment.
Arrows came forth as soon as they were within
shot, and they hastened back in dismay. In the
camp all was now astir, as if for battle; for the
dwarves of Dain were advancing along the
eastern bank.

“Fools!” laughed Bard, “to come thus
beneath the Mountain’s arm! They do not
understand war above ground, whatever they
may know of battle in the mines. There are
many of our archers and spearmen now hidden
in the rocks upon their right flank. Dwarf-mail

may be good, but they will soon be hard put to
it. Let us set on them now from both sides,
before they are fully rested!”

But the Elvenking said: “Long will I tarry, ere
I begin this war for gold. The dwarves cannot
pass us, unless we will, or do anything that we
cannot mark. Let us hope still for something that
will bring reconciliation. Our advantage in
numbers will be enough, if in the end it must
come to unhappy blows.”

But he reckoned without the dwarves. The
knowledge that the Arkenstone was in the
hands of the besiegers burned in their thoughts;
also they guessed the hesitation of Bard and
his friends, and resolved to strike while they
debated.

Suddenly without a signal they sprang
silently forward to attack. Bows twanged and
arrows whistled; battle was about to be joined.

Still more suddenly a darkness came on
with dreadful swiftness! A black cloud hurried
over the sky. Winter thunder on a wild wind
rolled roaring up and rumbled in the Mountain,
and lightning lit its peak. And beneath the
thunder another blackness could be seen
whirling forward; but it did not come with the
wind, it came from the North, like a vast cloud of
birds, so dense that no light could be seen
between their wings.

“Halt!” cried Gandalf, who appeared
suddenly, and stood alone, with arms uplifted,
between the advancing dwarves and the ranks
awaiting them. “Halt!” he called in a voice like
thunder, and his staff blazed forth with a flash
like the lightning. “Dread has come upon you
all! Alas! it has come more swiftly than I
guessed. The Goblins are upon you! Bolg- of
the North is coming, O Dain! whose father you
slew in Moria. Behold! the bats are above his
army like a sea of locusts. They ride upon
wolves and Wargs are in their train!”

Amazement and confusion fell upon them
all. Even as Gandalf had been speaking the
darkness grew. The dwarves halted and gazed
at the sky. The elves cried out with many voices.

“Come!” called Gandalf. “There is yet time
for council. Let Dain son of Nain come swiftly to
us!”

So began a battle that none had expected; and
it was called the Battle of Five Armies, and it
was very terrible. Upon one side were the
Goblins and the Wild Wolves, and upon the
other were Elves and Men and Dwarves. This is
how it fell out. Ever since the fall of the Great
Goblin of the Misty Mountains the hatred of their

race for the dwarves had been rekindled to fury.
Messengers had passed to and fro between all
their cities, colonies and strongholds; for they
resolved now to win the dominion of the North.
Tidings they had gathered in secret ways; and
in all the mountains there was a forging and an
arming. Then they marched and gathered by hill
and valley, going ever by tunnel or under dark,
until around and beneath the great mountain
Gundabad of the North, where was their capital,
a vast host was assembled ready to sweep
down in time of storm unawares upon the
South. Then they learned of the death of
Smaug, and joy was in their hearts; and they
hastened night after night through the
mountains, and came thus at last on a sudden
from the North hard on the heels of Dain. Not
even the ravens knew of their coming until they
came out in the broken lands which divided the
Lonely Mountain from the hills behind. How
much Gandalf knew cannot be said, but it is
plain that he had not expected this sudden
assault.

This is the plan that he made in council with
the Elven-king and with Bard; and with Dain, for
the dwarf-lord now joined them: the Goblins
were the foes of all, and at their coming all other
quarrels were forgotten. Their only hope was to
lure the goblins into the valley between the arms

of the Mountain; and themselves to man the
great spurs that struck south and east. Yet this
would be perilous, if the goblins were in
sufficient numbers to overrun the Mountain
itself, and so attack them also from behind and
above; but there was no time to make any other
plan, or to summon any help.

Soon the thunder passed, rolling away to
the South-East; but the bat-cloud came, flying
lower, over the shoulder of the Mountain, and
whirled above them shutting out the light and
filling them with dread.

“To the Mountain!” called Bard. “To the
Mountain! Let us take our places while there is
yet time!”

On the Southern spur, in its lower slopes
and in the rocks at its feet, the Elves were set;
on the Eastern spur were men and dwarves.
But Bard and some of the nimblest of men and
elves climbed to the height of the Eastern
shoulder to gain a view to the North. Soon they
could see the lands before the Mountain’s feet
black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the
vanguard swirled round the spur’s end and
came rushing into Dale. These were the
swiftest wolf-riders, and already their cries and
howls rent the air afar. A few brave men were
strung before them to make a feint of
resistance, and many there fell before the rest

drew back and fled to either side. As Gandalf
had hoped, the goblin army had gathered
behind the resisted vanguard, and poured now
in rage into the valley, driving wildly up between
the arms of the Mountain, seeking for the foe.
Their banners were countless, black and red,
and they came on like a tide in fury and
disorder.

It was a terrible battle. The most dreadful of
all Bilbo’s experiences, and the one which at
the time he hated most — which is to say it was
the one he was most proud of, and most fond of
recalling long afterwards, although he was quite
unimportant in it. Actually I may say he put on
his ring early in the business, and vanished
from sight, if not from all danger. A magic ring
of that sort is not a complete protection in a
goblin charge, nor does it stop flying arrows
and wild spears; but it does help in getting out
of the way, and it prevents your head from being
specially chosen for a sweeping stroke by a
goblin swordsman.

The elves were the first to charge. Their
hatred for the goblins is cold and bitter. Their
spears and swords shone in the gloom with a
gleam of chill flame, so deadly was the wrath of
the hands that held them. As soon as the host of
their enemies was dense in the valley, they sent
against it a shower of arrows, and each

flickered as it fled as if with stinging fire. Behind
the arrows a thousand of their spearmen leapt
down and charged. The yells were deafening.
The rocks were stained black with goblin blood.

Just as the goblins were recovering from
the onslaught and the elf-charge was halted,
there rose from across the valley a deep-
throated roar. With cries of “Moria!” and “Dain,
Dain!” the dwarves of the Iron Hills plunged in,
wielding their mattocks, upon the other side;
and beside them came the men of the Lake
with long swords.

Panic came upon the Goblins; and even as
they turned to meet this new attack, the elves
charged again with renewed numbers. Already
many of the goblins were flying back down the
river to escape from the trap; and many of their
own wolves were turning upon them and
rending the dead and the wounded. Victory
seemed at hand, when a cry rang out on the
heights above.

Goblins had scaled the Mountain from the
other side and already many were on the
slopes above the Gate, and others were
streaming down recklessly, heedless of those
that fell screaming from cliff and precipice, to
attack the spurs from above. Each of these
could be reached by paths that ran down from
the main mass of the Mountain in the centre;

and the defenders had too few to bar the way
for long. Victory now vanished from hope. They
had only stemmed the first onslaught of the
black tide.

Day drew on. The goblins gathered again in
the valley. There a host of Wargs came
ravening and with them came the bodyguard of
Bolg, goblins of huge size with scimitars of
steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into a
stormy sky; while still the great bats swirled
about the heads and ears of elves and men, or
fastened vampire-like on the stricken. Now
Bard was fighting to defend the Eastern spur,
and yet giving slowly back; and the elf-lords
were at bay about their king upon the southern
arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill.

Suddenly there was a great shout, and from
the Gate came a trumpet call. They had
forgotten Thorin! Part of the wall, moved by
levers, fell outward with a crash into the pool.
Out leapt the King under the Mountain, and his
companions followed him. Hood and cloak
were gone; they were in shining armour, and
red light leapt from their eyes. In the gloom the
great dwarf gleamed like gold in a dying fire.

Rocks were hurled down from on high by
the goblins above; but they held on, leapt down
to the falls’ foot, and rushed forward to battle.
Wolf and rider fell or fled before them. Thorin

wielded his axe with mighty strokes, and
nothing seemed to harm him.

“To me! To me! Elves and Men! To me! O
my kinsfolk!” he cried, and his voice shook like
a horn in the valley.

Down, heedless of order, rushed all the
dwarves of Dain to his help. Down too came
many of the Lake-men, for Bard could not
restrain them; and out upon the other side came
many of the spearmen of the elves. Once again
the goblins were stricken in the valley; and they
were piled in heaps till Dale was dark and
hideous with their corpses. The Wargs were
scattered and Thorin drove right against the
bodyguard of Bolg. But he could not pierce their
ranks.

Already behind him among the goblin dead
lay many men and many dwarves, and many a
fair elf that should have lived yet long ages
merrily in the wood. And as the valley widened
his onset grew ever slower. His numbers were
too few. His flanks were unguarded. Soon the
attackers were attacked, and they were forced
into a great ring, facing every way, hemmed all
about with goblins and wolves returning to the
assault. The bodyguard of Bolg came howling
against them, and drove in upon their ranks like
waves upon cliffs of sand. Their friends could
not help them, for the assault from the Mountain

was renewed with redoubled force, and upon
either side men and elves were being slowly
beaten down.

On all this Bilbo looked with misery. He had
taken his stand on Ravenhill among the Elves —
partly because there was more chance of
escape from that point, and partly (with the
more Tookish part of his mind) because if he
was going to be in a last desperate stand, he
preferred on the whole to defend the Elvenking.
Gandalf, too, I may say, was there, sitting on the
ground as if in deep thought, preparing, I
suppose, some last blast of magic before the
end.

That did not seem far off. “It will not be long
now,” thought Bilbo, “before the goblins win the
Gate, and we are all slaughtered or driven down
and captured. Really it is enough to make one
weep, after all one has gone through. I would
rather old Smaug had been left with all the
wretched treasure, than that these vile creatures
should get it, and poor old Bombur, and Balin
and Fili and Kili and all the rest come to a bad
end; and Bard too, and the Lake-men and the
merry elves. Misery me! I have heard songs of
many battles, and I have always understood that
defeat may be glorious. It seems very
uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I
was well out of it.”

The clouds were torn by the wind, and a red
sunset slashed the West. Seeing the sudden
gleam in the gloom Bilbo looked round. He
gave a great cry: he had seen a sight that made
his heart leap, dark shapes small yet majestic
against the distant glow.

“The Eagles! The Eagles!” he shouted. “The
Eagles are coming!”

Bilbo’s eyes were seldom wrong. The
eagles were coming down the wind, line after
line, in such a host as must have gathered from
all the eyries of the North.

“The Eagles! the Eagles!” Bilbo cried,
dancing and waving his arms. If the elves could
not see him they could hear him. Soon they too
took up the cry, and it echoed across the valley.
Many wondering eyes looked up, though as yet
nothing could be seen except from the southern
shoulders of the Mountain.

“The Eagles!” cried Bilbo once more, but at
that moment a stone hurtling from above smote
heavily on his helm, and he fell with a crash and
knew no more.

Chapter XVIII

THE RETURN JOURNEY

When Bilbo came to himself, he was literally by
himself. He was lying on the flat stones of
Ravenhill, and no one was near. A cloudless
day, but cold, was broad above him. He was
shaking, and as chilled as stone, but his head
burned with fire.

"Now I wonder what has happened?” he
said to himself. “At any rate I am not yet one of
the fallen heroes; but I suppose there is still time
enough for that!”

He sat up painfully. Looking into the valley
he could see no living goblins. After a while as
his head cleared a little, he thought he could
see elves moving in the rocks below. He
rubbed his eyes. Surely there was a camp still
in the plain some distance off; and there was a
coming and going about the Gate? Dwarves
seemed to be busy removing the wall. But all
was deadly still. There was no call and no echo

of a song. Sorrow seemed to be in the air.

“Victory after all, I suppose!” he said, feeling
his aching head. “Well, it seems a very gloomy
business.”

Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing
up and coming towards him.

“Hullo there!” he called with a shaky voice.
“Hullo there! What news?”

“What voice is it that speaks among the
stones?” said the man halting and peering
about him not far from where Bilbo sat.

Then Bilbo remembered his ring! “Well I’m
blessed!” said he. “This invisibility has its
drawbacks after all. Otherwise I suppose I might
have spent a warm and comfortable night in
bed!”

“It’s me, Bilbo Baggins, companion of
Thorin!” he cried, hurriedly taking off the ring.

“It is well that I have found you!” said the
man striding forward. “You are needed and we
have looked for you long. You would have been
numbered among the dead, who are many, if
Gandalf the wizard had not said that your voice
was last heard in this place. I have been sent to
look here for the last time. Are you much hurt?”

“A nasty knock on the head, I think,” said
Bilbo. “But I have a helm and a hard skull. All the
same I feel sick and my legs are like straws.”

“I will carry you down to the camp in the

valley,” said the man, and picked him lightly up.

The man was swift and sure-footed. It was
not long before Bilbo was set down before a
tent in Dale; and there stood Gandalf, with his
arm in a sling. Even the wizard had not
escaped without a wound; and there were few
unharmed in all the host.

When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted.
“Baggins!” he exclaimed. “Well I never! Alive
after all — I am glad! I began to wonder if even
your luck would see you through! A terrible
business, and it nearly was disastrous. But
other news can wait. Come!” he said more
gravely. “You are called for;” and leading the
hobbit he took him within the tent.

“Hail! Thorin,” he said as he entered. “I have
brought him.”

There indeed lay Thorin Oakenshield,
wounded with many wounds, and his rent
armour and notched axe were cast upon the
floor. He looked up as Bilbo came beside him.

“Farewell, good thief,” he said. “I go now to
the halls of waiting to sit beside my fathers, until
the world is renewed. Since I leave now all gold
and silver, and go where it is of little worth, I
wish to part in friendship from you, and I would
take back my words and deeds at the Gate.”

Bilbo knelt on one knee filled with sorrow.
“Farewell, King under the Mountain!” he said.

“This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and
not a mountain of gold can amend it. Yet I am
glad that I have shared in your perils — that has
been more than any Baggins deserves.”

“No!” said Thorin. “There is more in you of
good than you know, child of the kindly West.
Some courage and some wisdom, blended in
measure. If more of us valued food and cheer
and song above hoarded gold, it would be a
merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave it
now. Farewell!”

Then Bilbo turned away, and he went by
himself, and sat alone wrapped in a blanket,
and, whether you believe it or not, he wept until
his eyes were red and his voice was hoarse.
He was a kindly little soul. Indeed it was long
before he had the heart to make a joke again.
“A mercy it is,” he said at last to himself, “that I
woke up when I did. I wish Thorin were living,
but I am glad that we parted in kindness. You
are a fool, Bilbo Baggins, and you made a
great mess of that business with the stone; and
there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to
buy peace and quiet, but I suppose you can
hardly be blamed for that.”

All that had happened after he was stunned,

Bilbo learned later; but it gave him more sorrow
than joy, and he was now weary of his
adventure. He was aching in his bones for the
homeward journey That, however, was a little
delayed, so in the meantime I will tell something
of events. The Eagles had long had suspicion
of the goblins’ mustering; from their
watchfulness the movements in the mountains
could not be altogether hid. So they too had
gathered in great numbers, under the great
Eagle of the Misty Mountains; and at length
smelling battle from afar they had come
speeding down the gale in the nick of time.
They it was who dislodged the goblins from the
mountain-slopes, casting them over precipices,
or driving them down shrieking and bewildered
among their foes. It was not long before they
had freed the Lonely Mountain, and elves and
men on either side of the valley could come at
last to the help of the battle below.

But even with the Eagles they were still
outnumbered. In that last hour Beorn himself
had appeared — no one knew how or from
where. He came alone, and in bear’s shape;
and he seemed to have grown almost to giant-
size in his wrath.

The roar of his voice was like drums and
guns; and he tossed wolves and goblins from
his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon

their rear, and broke like a clap of thunder
through the ring. The dwarves were making a
stand still about their lords upon a low rounded
hill. Then Beorn stooped and lifted Thorin, who
had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him
out of the fray.

Swiftly he returned and his wrath was
redoubled, so that nothing could withstand him,
and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He
scattered the bodyguard, and pulled down Bolg
himself and crushed him. Then dismay fell on
the Goblins and they fled in all directions. But
weariness left their enemies with the coming of
new hope, and they pursued them closely, and
prevented most of them from escaping where
they could. They drove many of them into the
Running River, and such as fled south or west
they hunted into the marshes about the Forest
River; and there the greater part of the last
fugitives perished, while those that came hardly
to the Wood-elves’ realm were there slain, or
drawn in to die deep in the trackless dark of
Mirkwood. Songs have said that three parts of
the goblin warriors of the North perished on that
day, and the mountains had peace for many a
year.

Victory had been assured before the fall of
night; but the pursuit was still on foot, when
Bilbo returned to the camp; and not many were

in the valley save the more grievously wounded.

“Where are the Eagles?” he asked Gandalf
that evening, as he lay wrapped in many warm
blankets.

“Some are in the hunt,” said the wizard, “but
most have gone back to their eyries. They
would not stay here, and departed with the first
light of morning. Dain has crowned their chief
with gold, and sworn friendship with them
forever.”

“I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to
see them again,” said Bilbo sleepily; “perhaps I
shall see them on the way home. I suppose I
shall be going home soon?”

“As soon as you like,” said the wizard.

Actually it was some days before Bilbo
really set out. They buried Thorin deep beneath
the Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone
upon his breast.

“There let it lie till the Mountain falls!” he
said. “May it bring good fortune to all his folk
that dwell here after!”

Upon his tomb the Elvenking then laid
Orcrist, the elvish sword that had been taken
from Thorin in captivity. It is said in songs that it
gleamed ever in the dark if foes approached,
and the fortress of the dwarves could not be
taken by surprise. There now Dain son of Nain
took up his abode, and he became King under

the Mountain, and in time many other dwarves
gathered to his throne in the ancient halls. Of
the twelve companions of Thorin, ten remained.
Fili and Kili had fallen defending him with shield
and body, for he was their mother’s elder
brother. The others remained with Dain; for
Dain dealt his treasure well.

There was, of course, no longer any
question of dividing the hoard in such shares as
had been planned, to Balin and Dwalin, and
Dori and Nori and Ori, and Oin and Gloin, and
Bifur and Bofur and Bombur — or to Bilbo. Yet a
fourteenth share of all the silver and gold,
wrought and unwrought, was given up to Bard;
for Dain said: “We will honour the agreement of
the dead, and he has now the Arkenstone in his
keeping.”

Even a fourteenth share was wealth
exceedingly great, greater than that of many
mortal kings. From that treasure Bard sent
much gold to the Master of Lake-town; and he
rewarded his followers and friends freely. To the
Elvenking he gave the emeralds of Girion, such
jewels as he most loved, which Dain had
restored to him.

To Bilbo he said: “This treasure is as much
yours as it is mine; though old agreements
cannot stand, since so many have a claim in its
winning and defence. Yet even though you were

willing to lay aside all your claim, I should wish
that the words of Thorin, of which he repented,
should not prove true: that we should give you
little. I would reward you most richly of all.”

“Very kind of you,” said Bilbo. “But really it
is a relief to me. How on earth should I have got
all that treasure home without war and murder
all along the way, I don’t know. And I don’t know
what I should have done with it when I got home.
I am sure it is better in your hands.”

In the end he would only take two small
chests, one filled with silver, and the other with
gold, such as one strong pony could carry. “That
will be quite as much as I can manage,” said
he.

At last the time came for him to say good-
bye to his friends. “Farewell, Balin!” he said;
“and farewell, Dwalin; and farewell Dori, Nori,
Ori, Oin, Gloin, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur! May
your beards never grow thin!” And turning
towards the Mountain he added: “Farewell
Thorin Oakenshield! And Fili and Kili! May your
memory never fade!”

Then the dwarves bowed low before their
Gate, but words stuck in their throats. “Good-
bye and good luck, wherever you fare!” said
Balin at last. “If ever you visit us again, when our
halls are made fair once more, then the feast
shall indeed be splendid!”

“If ever you are passing my way,” said
Bilbo, “don’t wait to knock! Tea is at four; but
any of you are welcome at anytime!”

Then he turned away.

The elf-host was on the march; and if it was
sadly lessened, yet many were glad, for now the
northern world would be merrier for many a long
day. The dragon was dead, and the goblins
overthrown, and their hearts looked forward
after winter to a spring of joy.

Gandalf and Bilbo rode behind the
Elvenking, and beside them strode Beorn, once
again in man’s shape, and he laughed and
sang in a loud voice upon the road. So they
went on until they drew near to the borders of
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the
Forest River ran out. Then they halted, for the
wizard and Bilbo would not enter the wood,
even though the king bade them stay a while in
his halls. They intended to go along the edge of
the forest, and round its northern end in the
waste that lay between it and the beginning of
the Grey Mountains. It was a long and cheerless
road, but now that the goblins were crushed, it
seemed safer to them than the dreadful
pathways under the trees. Moreover Beorn was

going that way too.

“Farewell! O Elvenking!” said Gandalf.
“Merry be the greenwood, while the world is yet
young! And merry be all your folk!”

“Farewell! O Gandalf!” said the king. “May
you ever appear where you are most needed
and least expected! The oftener you appear in
my halls the better shall I be pleased!”

“I beg of you,” said Bilbo stammering and
standing on one foot, “to accept this gift!” and
he brought out a necklace of silver and pearls
that Dain had given him at their parting.

“In what way have I earned such a gift, O
hobbit?” said the king.

“Well, er, I thought, don’t you know,” said
Bilbo rather confused, “that, er, some little return
should be made for your, er, hospitality. I mean
even a burglar has his feelings. I have drunk
much of your wine and eaten much of your
bread.”

“I will take your gift, O Bilbo the
Magnificent!” said the king gravely. “And I name
you elf-friend and blessed. May your shadow
never grow less (or stealing would be too easy)!
Farewell!”

Then the elves turned towards the Forest,
and Bilbo started on his long road home.

He had many hardships and adventures before
he got back. The Wild was still the Wild, and
there were many other things in it in those days
beside goblins; but he was well guided and well
guarded — the wizard was with him, and Beorn
for much of the way — and he was never in great
danger again. Anyway by midwinter Gandalf
and Bilbo had come all the way back, along
both edges of the Forest, to the doors of
Beorn’s house; and there for a while they both
stayed. Yule-tide was warm and merry there;
and men came from far and wide to feast at
Beorn’s bidding. The goblins of the Misty
Mountains were now few and terrified, and
hidden in the deepest holes they could find; and
the Wargs had vanished from the woods, so
that men went abroad without fear. Beorn
indeed became a great chief afterwards in
those regions and ruled a wide land between
the mountains and the wood; and it is said that
for many generations the men of his line had the
power of taking bear’s shape, and some were
grim men and bad, but most were in heart like
Beorn, if less in size and strength. In their day
the last goblins were hunted from the Misty
Mountains and a new peace came over the
edge of the Wild.

It was spring, and a fair one with mild

weathers and a bright sun, before Bilbo and
Gandalf took their leave at last of Beorn, and
though he longed for home, Bilbo left with
regret, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn
were in springtime no less marvellous than in
high summer.

At last they came up the long road, and
reached the very pass where the goblins had
captured them before. But they came to that
high point at morning, and looking backward
they saw a white sun shining over the
outstretched lands. There behind lay Mirkwood,
blue in the distance, and darkly green at the
nearer edge even in the spring. There far away
was the Lonely Mountain on the edge of
eyesight. On its highest peak snow yet
unmelted was gleaming pale.

“So comes snow after fire, and even
dragons have their ending!” said Bilbo, and he
turned his back on his adventure. The Tookish
part was getting very tired, and the Baggins
was daily getting stronger. “I wish now only to
be in my own armchair!” he said.

Chapter X IX

THE LAST STAGE

It was on May the First that the two came back
at last to the brink of the valley of Rivendell,
where stood the Last (or the First) Homely
House. Again it was evening, their ponies were
tired, especially the one that carried the
baggage; and they all felt in need of rest. As
they rode down the steep path, Bilbo heard the
elves still singing in the trees, as if they had not
stopped since he left; and as soon as the riders
came down into the lower glades of the wood
they burst into a song of much the same kind as
before. This is something like it:

The dragon is withered,

His bones are nowcrumbled;
His armour is shivered,

His splendour is humbled!
Though svnrd shall be rusted,
And throne and crown perish
With strength that men trusted
And wealth that they cherish,
Here grass is still growing,
And leaves are yet swinging,
The white water flowing,

And elves are yet singing

Come! Tra-la-la-lally!

Come back to the valley!

The stars are far brighter
Than gems without measure,
The moon is far whiter
Than silver in treasure;

The fire is more shining
On hearth in the gloaming
Than gold won by mining,

So why go a-roaming?

O! Tra-la-la-lally

Come back to the Valley.

O! Where are you going,

So late in returning?

The river is flowing,

The stars are all burning!
O! Whither so laden,

So sad and so dreary?
Here elf and elf-maiden
Nowwelcome the weary
With Tra-la-la-lally
Come back to the Valley,
Tra-la-la-lally
Fa-1 a-la-l ally
Fa-la!

Then the elves of the valley came out and
greeted them and led them across the water to
the house of Elrond. There a warm welcome
was made them, and there were many eager
ears that evening to hear the tale of their
adventures. Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo
was fallen quiet and drowsy. Most of the tale he
knew, for he had been in it, and had himself told
much of it to the wizard on their homeward way
or in the house of Beorn; but every now and
again he would open one eye, and listen, when
a part of the story which he did not yet know
came in.

It was in this way that he learned where
Gandalf had been to; for he overheard the
words of the wizard to Elrond. It appeared that
Gandalf had been to a great council of the white
wizards, masters of lore and good magic; and
that they had at last driven the Necromancer
from his dark hold in the south of Mirkwood.

“Ere long now,” Gandalf was saying, “the
Forest will grow somewhat more wholesome.
The North will be freed from that horror for many
long years, I hope. Yet I wish he were banished
from the world!”

“It would be well indeed,” said Elrond; “but I
fear that will not come about in this age of the
world, or for many after.”

When the tale of their journeyings was told,
there were other tales, and yet more tales, tales
of long ago, and tales of new things, and tales
of no time at all, till Bilbo’s head fell forward on
his chest, and he snored comfortably in a
corner.

He woke to find himself in a white bed, and
the moon shining through an open window.
Below it many elves were singing loud and
clear on the banks of the stream.

Sing all ye joyful, nowsing all together!
The t fund’s in the tree-top, the wind’s in the
heather;

The stars are in blossom, the moon is in
flower,

And bright are the windows of Night in her
tower.

Dance all ye joyful, now dance all
together!

Soft is the grass, and let foot be like
feather!

The river is silver, the shadows are
fleeting;

Merry is May-time, and merry our
meeting.

Sing we now softly, and dreams let us
v\eave him!

Wind him in slumber and there let us
leave him!

The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his
pillow/.

Lullaby! Lullaby! Alder and Willow/

Sigh no more Pine, till the wind of the
mom!

Fall Moon! Dark be the land!

Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thom!
Hushed be all water, till dawn is at hand!

“Well, Merry People!” said Bilbo looking
out. “What time by the moon is this? Your lullaby
would waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you.”

“And your snores would waken a stone
dragon — yet we thank you,” they answered with
laughter. “It is drawing towards dawn, and you
have slept now since the night’s beginning.
Tomorrow, perhaps, you will be cured of
weariness.”

“A little sleep does a great cure in the
house of Elrond,” said he; “but I will take all the
cure I can get. A second good night, fair
friends!” And with that he went back to bed and
slept till late morning.

Weariness fell from him soon in that house,
and he had many a merry jest and dance, early
and late, with the elves of the valley. Yet even
that place could not long delay him now, and he
thought always of his own home. After a week,

therefore, he said farewell to Elrond, and giving
him such small gifts as he would accept, he
rode away with Gandalf.

Even as they left the valley the sky darkened
in the West before them, and wind and rain
came up to meet them.

“Merry is May-time!” said Bilbo, as the rain
beat into his face. “But our back is to legends
and we are coming home. I suppose this is the
first taste of it.”

“There is a long road yet,” said Gandalf.

“But it is the last road,” said Bilbo.

They came to the river that marked the very
edge of the borderland of the Wild, and to the
ford beneath the steep bank, which you may
remember. The water was swollen both with the
melting of the snows at the approach of
summer, and with the daylong rain; but they
crossed with some difficulty, and pressed
forward, as evening fell, on the last stage of
their journey.

This was much as it had been before,
except that the company was smaller, and more
silent; also this time there were no trolls. At
each point on the road Bilbo recalled the
happenings and the words of a year ago — it
seemed to him more like ten — so that, of
course, he quickly noted the place where the
pony had fallen in the river, and they had turned
aside for their nasty adventure with Tom and
Bert and Bill.

Not far from the road they found the gold of
the trolls, which they had buried, still hidden and
untouched. “I have enough to last me my time,”
said Bilbo, when they had dug it up. “You had
better take this, Gandalf. I daresay you can find
a use for it.”

“Indeed I can!” said the wizard. “But share
and share alike! You may find you have more
needs than you expect.”

So they put the gold in bags and slung them
on the ponies, who were not at all pleased

about it. After that their going was slower, for
most of the time they walked. But the land was
green and there was much grass through which
the hobbit strolled along contentedly. He
mopped his face with a red silk handkerchief —
no! not a single one of his own had survived, he
had borrowed this one from Elrond — for now
June had brought summer, and the weather
was bright and hot again.

As all things come to an end, even this
story, a day came at last when they were in
sight of the country where Bilbo had been born
and bred, where the shapes of the land and of
the trees were as well known to him as his
hands and toes. Coming to a rise he could see
his own Hill in the distance, and he stopped
suddenly and said:

Roads go ever ever on,

Over rock and under tree,

By caves wh ere never sun has shone,

By streams that never find the sea;
Over snow by winter sown,

And through the merry flowers of June,
Overgrass and over stone,

And under mountains in the moon.

Roads go ever ever on

Under cloud and under star,

Yet feet that wandering have gone
Turn at last to home afar.

Eyes that fire and s/ord have seen
And horror in the halls of stone
Look at last on meadows green

And trees and hills they long have
known.

Gandalf looked at him. “My dear Bilbo!” he
said. “Something is the matter with you! You are
not the hobbit that you were.”

And so they crossed the bridge and passed
the mill by the river and came right back to
Bilbo’s own door.

“Bless me! What’s going on?” he cried.
There was a great commotion, and people of all
sorts, respectable and unrespectable, were
thick round the door, and many were going in
and out — not even wiping their feet on the mat,
as Bilbo noticed with annoyance.

If he was surprised, they were more
surprised still. He had arrived back in the
middle of an auction! There was a large notice
in black and red hung on the gate, stating that
on June the Twenty-second Messrs Grubb,
Grubb, and Burrowes would sell by auction the
effects of the late Bilbo Baggins Esquire, of
Bag-End, Underhill, Hobbiton. Sale to
commence at ten o’clock sharp. It was now
nearly lunchtime, and most of the things had
already been sold, for various prices from next
to nothing to old songs (as is not unusual at
auctions). Bilbo’s cousins the Sackville-
Bagginses were, in fact, busy measuring his
rooms to see if their own furniture would fit. In
short Bilbo was “Presumed Dead”, and not
everybody that said so was sorry to find the
presumption wrong.

The return of Mr. Bilbo Baggins created
quite a disturbance, both under the Hill and over
the Hill, and across the Water; it was a great
deal more than a nine days’ wonder. The legal
bother, indeed, lasted for years. It was quite a
long time before Mr. Baggins was in fact
admitted to be alive again. The people who had
got specially good bargains at the Sale took a
deal of convincing; and in the end to save time
Bilbo had to buy back quite a lot of his own
furniture. Many of his silver spoons mysteriously
disappeared and were never accounted for.

Personally he suspected the Sackville-
Bagginses. On their side they never admitted
that the returned Baggins was genuine, and
they were not on friendly terms with Bilbo ever
after. They really had wanted to live in his nice
hobbit-hole so very much.

Indeed Bilbo found he had lost more than
spoons — he had lost his reputation. It is true
that for ever after he remained an elf-friend, and
had the honour of dwarves, wizards, and all
such folk as ever passed that way; but he was
no longer quite respectable. He was in fact held
by all the hobbits of the neighbourhood to be
‘queer’ — except by his nephews and nieces on
the Took side, but even they were not
encouraged in their friendship by their elders.

I am sorry to say he did not mind. He was
quite content; and the sound of the kettle on his
hearth was ever after more musical than it had
been even in the quiet days before the
Unexpected Party. His sword he hung over the
mantelpiece. His coat of mail was arranged on
a stand in the hall (until he lent it to a Museum).
His gold and silver was largely spent in
presents, both useful and extravagant — which to
a certain extent accounts for the affection of his
nephews and his nieces. His magic ring he
kept a great secret, for he chiefly used it when
unpleasant callers came.

He took to writing poetry and visiting the
elves; and though many shook their heads and
touched their foreheads and said “Poor old
Baggins!” and though few believed any of his
tales, he remained very happy to the end of his
days, and those were extraordinarily long.

One autumn evening some years afterwards
Bilbo was sitting in his study writing his
memoirs — he thought of calling them “There
and Back Again, a Hobbit’s Holiday” — when
there was a ring at the door. It was Gandalf and
a dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin.

“Come in! Come in!” said Bilbo, and soon
they were settled in chairs by the fire. If Balin
noticed that Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat was more
extensive (and had real gold buttons), Bilbo
also noticed that Balin’s beard was several
inches longer, and his jewelled belt was of great
magnificence.

They fell to talking of their times together, of
course, and Bilbo asked how things were going
in the lands of the Mountain. It seemed they
were going very well. Bard had rebuilt the town
in Dale and men had gathered to him from the
Lake and from South and West, and all the
valley had become tilled again and rich, and the
desolation was now filled with birds and
blossoms in spring and fruit and feasting in
autumn. And Lake-town was refounded and
was more prosperous than ever, and much
wealth went up and down the Running River;
and there was friendship in those parts
between elves and dwarves and men.

The Hall at Bag-End Residence of B.
Baggins Esquire

The old Master had come to a bad end.
Bard had given him much gold for the help of
the Lake-people, but being of the kind that
easily catches such disease he fell under the
dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold and
fled with it, and died of starvation in the Waste,
deserted by his companions.

“The new Master is of wiser kind,” said
Balin, “and very popular, for, of course, he gets
most of the credit for the present prosperity.
They are making songs which say that in his
day the rivers run with gold.”

“Then the prophecies of the old songs have
turned out to be true, after a fashion!” said
Bilbo.

“Of course!” said Gandalf. “And why should
not they prove true? Surely you don’t disbelieve
the prophecies, because you had a hand in
bringing them about yourself? You don’t really
suppose, do you, that all your adventures and
escapes were managed by mere luck, just for
your sole benefit? You are a very fine person,
Mr. Baggins, and I am very fond of you; but you
are only quite a little fellow in a wide world after
all!”

“Thank goodness!” said Bilbo laughing, and
handed him the tobacco-jar.

THE LOST WORLD

I have wrought my simple plan
If I give one hour of joy
To the boy who's half a man,
Or the man who's half a boy.

The Lost World

By

SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE

COPYRIGHT, 1912

Foreword

Mr. E. D. Malone desires to state that
both the injunction for restraint and the
libel action have been withdrawn unreservedly
by Professor G. E. Challenger, who, being
satisfied that no criticism or comment in
this book is meant in an offensive spirit,
has guaranteed that he will place no
impediment to its publication and circulation.

Contents

CHAPTER

I. "THERE ARE HEROISMS ALL ROUND US"
II. "TRY YOUR LUCK WITH PROFESSOR CHALLENGER"
III. "HE IS A PERFECTLY IMPOSSIBLE PERSON"
IV. "IT'S JUST THE VERY BIGGEST THING IN THE WORLD"
V. "QUESTION!"
VI. "I WAS THE FLAIL OF THE LORD"
VII. "TO-MORROW WE DISAPPEAR INTO THE UNKNOWN"
VIII. "THE OUTLYING PICKETS OF THE NEW WORLD"
IX. "WHO COULD HAVE FORESEEN IT?"
X. "THE MOST WONDERFUL THINGS HAVE HAPPENED"
XI. "FOR ONCE I WAS THE HERO"
XII. "IT WAS DREADFUL IN THE FOREST"
XIII. "A SIGHT I SHALL NEVER FORGET"
XIV. "THOSE WERE THE REAL CONQUESTS"
XV. "OUR EYES HAVE SEEN GREAT WONDERS"
XVI. "A PROCESSION! A PROCESSION!"

THE LOST WORLD

The Lost World

CHAPTER I

"There Are Heroisms All Round Us"

Mr. Hungerton, her father, really was the most tactless person upon
earth,--a fluffy, feathery, untidy cockatoo of a man, perfectly
good-natured, but absolutely centered upon his own silly self. If
anything could have driven me from Gladys, it would have been the
thought of such a father-in-law. I am convinced that he really
believed in his heart that I came round to the Chestnuts three days a
week for the pleasure of his company, and very especially to hear his
views upon bimetallism, a subject upon which he was by way of being an
authority.

For an hour or more that evening I listened to his monotonous chirrup
about bad money driving out good, the token value of silver, the
depreciation of the rupee, and the true standards of exchange.

"Suppose," he cried with feeble violence, "that all the debts in the
world were called up simultaneously, and immediate payment insisted
upon,--what under our present conditions would happen then?"

I gave the self-evident answer that I should be a ruined man, upon
which he jumped from his chair, reproved me for my habitual levity,
which made it impossible for him to discuss any reasonable subject in
my presence, and bounced off out of the room to dress for a Masonic
meeting.

At last I was alone with Gladys, and the moment of Fate had come! All
that evening I had felt like the soldier who awaits the signal which
will send him on a forlorn hope; hope of victory and fear of repulse
alternating in his mind.

She sat with that proud, delicate profile of hers outlined against the
red curtain. How beautiful she was! And yet how aloof! We had been
friends, quite good friends; but never could I get beyond the same
comradeship which I might have established with one of my
fellow-reporters upon the Gazette,--perfectly frank, perfectly kindly,
and perfectly unsexual. My instincts are all against a woman being too
frank and at her ease with me. It is no compliment to a man. Where
the real sex feeling begins, timidity and distrust are its companions,
heritage from old wicked days when love and violence went often hand in
hand. The bent head, the averted eye, the faltering voice, the wincing
figure--these, and not the unshrinking gaze and frank reply, are the
true signals of passion. Even in my short life I had learned as much
as that--or had inherited it in that race memory which we call instinct.

Gladys was full of every womanly quality. Some judged her to be cold
and hard; but such a thought was treason. That delicately bronzed
skin, almost oriental in its coloring, that raven hair, the large
liquid eyes, the full but exquisite lips,--all the stigmata of passion
were there. But I was sadly conscious that up to now I had never found
the secret of drawing it forth. However, come what might, I should
have done with suspense and bring matters to a head to-night. She
could but refuse me, and better be a repulsed lover than an accepted
brother.

So far my thoughts had carried me, and I was about to break the long
and uneasy silence, when two critical, dark eyes looked round at me,
and the proud head was shaken in smiling reproof. "I have a
presentiment that you are going to propose, Ned. I do wish you
wouldn't; for things are so much nicer as they are."

I drew my chair a little nearer. "Now, how did you know that I was
going to propose?" I asked in genuine wonder.

"Don't women always know? Do you suppose any woman in the world was
ever taken unawares? But--oh, Ned, our friendship has been so good and
so pleasant! What a pity to spoil it! Don't you feel how splendid it
is that a young man and a young woman should be able to talk face to
face as we have talked?"

"I don't know, Gladys. You see, I can talk face to face with--with the
station-master." I can't imagine how that official came into the
matter; but in he trotted, and set us both laughing. "That does not
satisfy me in the least. I want my arms round you, and your head on my
breast, and--oh, Gladys, I want----"

She had sprung from her chair, as she saw signs that I proposed to
demonstrate some of my wants. "You've spoiled everything, Ned," she
said. "It's all so beautiful and natural until this kind of thing
comes in! It is such a pity! Why can't you control yourself?"

"I didn't invent it," I pleaded. "It's nature. It's love."

"Well, perhaps if both love, it may be different. I have never felt
it."

"But you must--you, with your beauty, with your soul! Oh, Gladys, you
were made for love! You must love!"

"One must wait till it comes."

"But why can't you love me, Gladys? Is it my appearance, or what?"

She did unbend a little. She put forward a hand--such a gracious,
stooping attitude it was--and she pressed back my head. Then she
looked into my upturned face with a very wistful smile.

"No it isn't that," she said at last. "You're not a conceited boy by
nature, and so I can safely tell you it is not that. It's deeper."

"My character?"

She nodded severely.

"What can I do to mend it? Do sit down and talk it over. No, really,
I won't if you'll only sit down!"

She looked at me with a wondering distrust which was much more to my
mind than her whole-hearted confidence. How primitive and bestial it
looks when you put it down in black and white!--and perhaps after all
it is only a feeling peculiar to myself. Anyhow, she sat down.

"Now tell me what's amiss with me?"

"I'm in love with somebody else," said she.

It was my turn to jump out of my chair.

"It's nobody in particular," she explained, laughing at the expression
of my face: "only an ideal. I've never met the kind of man I mean."

"Tell me about him. What does he look like?"

"Oh, he might look very much like you."

"How dear of you to say that! Well, what is it that he does that I
don't do? Just say the word,--teetotal, vegetarian, aeronaut,
theosophist, superman. I'll have a try at it, Gladys, if you will only
give me an idea what would please you."

She laughed at the elasticity of my character. "Well, in the first
place, I don't think my ideal would speak like that," said she. "He
would be a harder, sterner man, not so ready to adapt himself to a
silly girl's whim. But, above all, he must be a man who could do, who
could act, who could look Death in the face and have no fear of him, a
man of great deeds and strange experiences. It is never a man that I
should love, but always the glories he had won; for they would be
reflected upon me. Think of Richard Burton! When I read his wife's
life of him I could so understand her love! And Lady Stanley! Did you
ever read the wonderful last chapter of that book about her husband?
These are the sort of men that a woman could worship with all her soul,
and yet be the greater, not the less, on account of her love, honored
by all the world as the inspirer of noble deeds."

She looked so beautiful in her enthusiasm that I nearly brought down
the whole level of the interview. I gripped myself hard, and went on
with the argument.

"We can't all be Stanleys and Burtons," said I; "besides, we don't get
the chance,--at least, I never had the chance. If I did, I should try
to take it."

"But chances are all around you. It is the mark of the kind of man I
mean that he makes his own chances. You can't hold him back. I've
never met him, and yet I seem to know him so well. There are heroisms
all round us waiting to be done. It's for men to do them, and for
women to reserve their love as a reward for such men. Look at that
young Frenchman who went up last week in a balloon. It was blowing a
gale of wind; but because he was announced to go he insisted on
starting. The wind blew him fifteen hundred miles in twenty-four
hours, and he fell in the middle of Russia. That was the kind of man I
mean. Think of the woman he loved, and how other women must have
envied her! That's what I should like to be,--envied for my man."

"I'd have done it to please you."

"But you shouldn't do it merely to please me. You should do it because
you can't help yourself, because it's natural to you, because the man
in you is crying out for heroic expression. Now, when you described
the Wigan coal explosion last month, could you not have gone down and
helped those people, in spite of the choke-damp?"

"I did."

"You never said so."

"There was nothing worth bucking about."

"I didn't know." She looked at me with rather more interest. "That
was brave of you."

"I had to. If you want to write good copy, you must be where the
things are."

"What a prosaic motive! It seems to take all the romance out of it.
But, still, whatever your motive, I am glad that you went down that
mine." She gave me her hand; but with such sweetness and dignity that
I could only stoop and kiss it. "I dare say I am merely a foolish
woman with a young girl's fancies. And yet it is so real with me, so
entirely part of my very self, that I cannot help acting upon it. If I
marry, I do want to marry a famous man!"

"Why should you not?" I cried. "It is women like you who brace men up.
Give me a chance, and see if I will take it! Besides, as you say, men
ought to MAKE their own chances, and not wait until they are given.
Look at Clive--just a clerk, and he conquered India! By George! I'll
do something in the world yet!"

She laughed at my sudden Irish effervescence. "Why not?" she said.
"You have everything a man could have,--youth, health, strength,
education, energy. I was sorry you spoke. And now I am glad--so
glad--if it wakens these thoughts in you!"

"And if I do----"

Her dear hand rested like warm velvet upon my lips. "Not another word,
Sir! You should have been at the office for evening duty half an hour
ago; only I hadn't the heart to remind you. Some day, perhaps, when
you have won your place in the world, we shall talk it over again."

And so it was that I found myself that foggy November evening pursuing
the Camberwell tram with my heart glowing within me, and with the eager
determination that not another day should elapse before I should find
some deed which was worthy of my lady. But who--who in all this wide
world could ever have imagined the incredible shape which that deed was
to take, or the strange steps by which I was led to the doing of it?

And, after all, this opening chapter will seem to the reader to have
nothing to do with my narrative; and yet there would have been no
narrative without it, for it is only when a man goes out into the world
with the thought that there are heroisms all round him, and with the
desire all alive in his heart to follow any which may come within sight
of him, that he breaks away as I did from the life he knows, and
ventures forth into the wonderful mystic twilight land where lie the
great adventures and the great rewards. Behold me, then, at the office
of the Daily Gazette, on the staff of which I was a most insignificant
unit, with the settled determination that very night, if possible, to
find the quest which should be worthy of my Gladys! Was it hardness,
was it selfishness, that she should ask me to risk my life for her own
glorification? Such thoughts may come to middle age; but never to
ardent three-and-twenty in the fever of his first love.

CHAPTER II

"Try Your Luck with Professor Challenger"

I always liked McArdle, the crabbed, old, round-backed, red-headed news
editor, and I rather hoped that he liked me. Of course, Beaumont was
the real boss; but he lived in the rarefied atmosphere of some Olympian
height from which he could distinguish nothing smaller than an
international crisis or a split in the Cabinet. Sometimes we saw him
passing in lonely majesty to his inner sanctum, with his eyes staring
vaguely and his mind hovering over the Balkans or the Persian Gulf. He
was above and beyond us. But McArdle was his first lieutenant, and it
was he that we knew. The old man nodded as I entered the room, and he
pushed his spectacles far up on his bald forehead.

"Well, Mr. Malone, from all I hear, you seem to be doing very well,"
said he in his kindly Scotch accent.

I thanked him.

"The colliery explosion was excellent. So was the Southwark fire. You
have the true descreeptive touch. What did you want to see me about?"

"To ask a favor."

He looked alarmed, and his eyes shunned mine. "Tut, tut! What is it?"

"Do you think, Sir, that you could possibly send me on some mission for
the paper? I would do my best to put it through and get you some good
copy."

"What sort of meesion had you in your mind, Mr. Malone?"

"Well, Sir, anything that had adventure and danger in it. I really
would do my very best. The more difficult it was, the better it would
suit me."

"You seem very anxious to lose your life."

"To justify my life, Sir."

"Dear me, Mr. Malone, this is very--very exalted. I'm afraid the day
for this sort of thing is rather past. The expense of the 'special
meesion' business hardly justifies the result, and, of course, in any
case it would only be an experienced man with a name that would command
public confidence who would get such an order. The big blank spaces in
the map are all being filled in, and there's no room for romance
anywhere. Wait a bit, though!" he added, with a sudden smile upon his
face. "Talking of the blank spaces of the map gives me an idea. What
about exposing a fraud--a modern Munchausen--and making him
rideeculous? You could show him up as the liar that he is! Eh, man,
it would be fine. How does it appeal to you?"

"Anything--anywhere--I care nothing."

McArdle was plunged in thought for some minutes.

"I wonder whether you could get on friendly--or at least on talking
terms with the fellow," he said, at last. "You seem to have a sort of
genius for establishing relations with people--seempathy, I suppose, or
animal magnetism, or youthful vitality, or something. I am conscious
of it myself."

"You are very good, sir."

"So why should you not try your luck with Professor Challenger, of
Enmore Park?"

I dare say I looked a little startled.

"Challenger!" I cried. "Professor Challenger, the famous zoologist!
Wasn't he the man who broke the skull of Blundell, of the Telegraph?"

The news editor smiled grimly.

"Do you mind? Didn't you say it was adventures you were after?"

"It is all in the way of business, sir," I answered.

"Exactly. I don't suppose he can always be so violent as that. I'm
thinking that Blundell got him at the wrong moment, maybe, or in the
wrong fashion. You may have better luck, or more tact in handling him.
There's something in your line there, I am sure, and the Gazette should
work it."

"I really know nothing about him," said I. "I only remember his name
in connection with the police-court proceedings, for striking Blundell."

"I have a few notes for your guidance, Mr. Malone. I've had my eye on
the Professor for some little time." He took a paper from a drawer.
"Here is a summary of his record. I give it you briefly:--

"'Challenger, George Edward. Born: Largs, N. B., 1863. Educ.: Largs
Academy; Edinburgh University. British Museum Assistant, 1892.
Assistant-Keeper of Comparative Anthropology Department, 1893.
Resigned after acrimonious correspondence same year. Winner of
Crayston Medal for Zoological Research. Foreign Member of'--well,
quite a lot of things, about two inches of small type--'Societe Belge,
American Academy of Sciences, La Plata, etc., etc. Ex-President
Palaeontological Society. Section H, British Association'--so on, so
on!--'Publications: "Some Observations Upon a Series of Kalmuck
Skulls"; "Outlines of Vertebrate Evolution"; and numerous papers,
including "The underlying fallacy of Weissmannism," which caused heated
discussion at the Zoological Congress of Vienna. Recreations: Walking,
Alpine climbing. Address: Enmore Park, Kensington, W.'

"There, take it with you. I've nothing more for you to-night."

I pocketed the slip of paper.

"One moment, sir," I said, as I realized that it was a pink bald head,
and not a red face, which was fronting me. "I am not very clear yet
why I am to interview this gentleman. What has he done?"

The face flashed back again.

"Went to South America on a solitary expedeetion two years ago. Came
back last year. Had undoubtedly been to South America, but refused to
say exactly where. Began to tell his adventures in a vague way, but
somebody started to pick holes, and he just shut up like an oyster.
Something wonderful happened--or the man's a champion liar, which is
the more probable supposeetion. Had some damaged photographs, said to
be fakes. Got so touchy that he assaults anyone who asks questions,
and heaves reporters down the stairs. In my opinion he's just a
homicidal megalomaniac with a turn for science. That's your man, Mr.
Malone. Now, off you run, and see what you can make of him. You're
big enough to look after yourself. Anyway, you are all safe.
Employers' Liability Act, you know."

A grinning red face turned once more into a pink oval, fringed with
gingery fluff; the interview was at an end.

I walked across to the Savage Club, but instead of turning into it I
leaned upon the railings of Adelphi Terrace and gazed thoughtfully for
a long time at the brown, oily river. I can always think most sanely
and clearly in the open air. I took out the list of Professor
Challenger's exploits, and I read it over under the electric lamp.
Then I had what I can only regard as an inspiration. As a Pressman, I
felt sure from what I had been told that I could never hope to get into
touch with this cantankerous Professor. But these recriminations,
twice mentioned in his skeleton biography, could only mean that he was
a fanatic in science. Was there not an exposed margin there upon which
he might be accessible? I would try.

I entered the club. It was just after eleven, and the big room was
fairly full, though the rush had not yet set in. I noticed a tall,
thin, angular man seated in an arm-chair by the fire. He turned as I
drew my chair up to him. It was the man of all others whom I should
have chosen--Tarp Henry, of the staff of Nature, a thin, dry, leathery
creature, who was full, to those who knew him, of kindly humanity. I
plunged instantly into my subject.

"What do you know of Professor Challenger?"

"Challenger?" He gathered his brows in scientific disapproval.
"Challenger was the man who came with some cock-and-bull story from
South America."

"What story?"

"Oh, it was rank nonsense about some queer animals he had discovered.
I believe he has retracted since. Anyhow, he has suppressed it all.
He gave an interview to Reuter's, and there was such a howl that he saw
it wouldn't do. It was a discreditable business. There were one or
two folk who were inclined to take him seriously, but he soon choked
them off."

"How?"

"Well, by his insufferable rudeness and impossible behavior. There was
poor old Wadley, of the Zoological Institute. Wadley sent a message:
'The President of the Zoological Institute presents his compliments to
Professor Challenger, and would take it as a personal favor if he would
do them the honor to come to their next meeting.' The answer was
unprintable."

"You don't say?"

"Well, a bowdlerized version of it would run: 'Professor Challenger
presents his compliments to the President of the Zoological Institute,
and would take it as a personal favor if he would go to the devil.'"

"Good Lord!"

"Yes, I expect that's what old Wadley said. I remember his wail at the
meeting, which began: 'In fifty years experience of scientific
intercourse----' It quite broke the old man up."

"Anything more about Challenger?"

"Well, I'm a bacteriologist, you know. I live in a
nine-hundred-diameter microscope. I can hardly claim to take serious
notice of anything that I can see with my naked eye. I'm a
frontiersman from the extreme edge of the Knowable, and I feel quite
out of place when I leave my study and come into touch with all you
great, rough, hulking creatures. I'm too detached to talk scandal, and
yet at scientific conversaziones I HAVE heard something of Challenger,
for he is one of those men whom nobody can ignore. He's as clever as
they make 'em--a full-charged battery of force and vitality, but a
quarrelsome, ill-conditioned faddist, and unscrupulous at that. He had
gone the length of faking some photographs over the South American
business."

"You say he is a faddist. What is his particular fad?"

"He has a thousand, but the latest is something about Weissmann and
Evolution. He had a fearful row about it in Vienna, I believe."

"Can't you tell me the point?"

"Not at the moment, but a translation of the proceedings exists. We
have it filed at the office. Would you care to come?"

"It's just what I want. I have to interview the fellow, and I need
some lead up to him. It's really awfully good of you to give me a
lift. I'll go with you now, if it is not too late."

Half an hour later I was seated in the newspaper office with a huge
tome in front of me, which had been opened at the article "Weissmann
versus Darwin," with the sub heading, "Spirited Protest at Vienna.
Lively Proceedings." My scientific education having been somewhat
neglected, I was unable to follow the whole argument, but it was
evident that the English Professor had handled his subject in a very
aggressive fashion, and had thoroughly annoyed his Continental
colleagues. "Protests," "Uproar," and "General appeal to the Chairman"
were three of the first brackets which caught my eye. Most of the
matter might have been written in Chinese for any definite meaning that
it conveyed to my brain.

"I wish you could translate it into English for me," I said,
pathetically, to my help-mate.

"Well, it is a translation."

"Then I'd better try my luck with the original."

"It is certainly rather deep for a layman."

"If I could only get a single good, meaty sentence which seemed to
convey some sort of definite human idea, it would serve my turn. Ah,
yes, this one will do. I seem in a vague way almost to understand it.
I'll copy it out. This shall be my link with the terrible Professor."

"Nothing else I can do?"

"Well, yes; I propose to write to him. If I could frame the letter
here, and use your address it would give atmosphere."

"We'll have the fellow round here making a row and breaking the
furniture."

"No, no; you'll see the letter--nothing contentious, I assure you."

"Well, that's my chair and desk. You'll find paper there. I'd like to
censor it before it goes."

It took some doing, but I flatter myself that it wasn't such a bad job
when it was finished. I read it aloud to the critical bacteriologist
with some pride in my handiwork.

"DEAR PROFESSOR CHALLENGER," it said, "As a humble student of Nature, I
have always taken the most profound interest in your speculations as to
the differences between Darwin and Weissmann. I have recently had
occasion to refresh my memory by re-reading----"

"You infernal liar!" murmured Tarp Henry.

--"by re-reading your masterly address at Vienna. That lucid and
admirable statement seems to be the last word in the matter. There is
one sentence in it, however--namely: 'I protest strongly against the
insufferable and entirely dogmatic assertion that each separate id is a
microcosm possessed of an historical architecture elaborated slowly
through the series of generations.' Have you no desire, in view of
later research, to modify this statement? Do you not think that it is
over-accentuated? With your permission, I would ask the favor of an
interview, as I feel strongly upon the subject, and have certain
suggestions which I could only elaborate in a personal conversation.
With your consent, I trust to have the honor of calling at eleven
o'clock the day after to-morrow (Wednesday) morning.

"I remain, Sir, with assurances of profound respect, yours very truly,

EDWARD D. MALONE."

"How's that?" I asked, triumphantly.

"Well if your conscience can stand it----"

"It has never failed me yet."

"But what do you mean to do?"

"To get there. Once I am in his room I may see some opening. I may
even go the length of open confession. If he is a sportsman he will be
tickled."

"Tickled, indeed! He's much more likely to do the tickling. Chain
mail, or an American football suit--that's what you'll want. Well,
good-bye. I'll have the answer for you here on Wednesday morning--if
he ever deigns to answer you. He is a violent, dangerous, cantankerous
character, hated by everyone who comes across him, and the butt of the
students, so far as they dare take a liberty with him. Perhaps it
would be best for you if you never heard from the fellow at all."

CHAPTER III

"He is a Perfectly Impossible Person"

My friend's fear or hope was not destined to be realized. When I
called on Wednesday there was a letter with the West Kensington
postmark upon it, and my name scrawled across the envelope in a
handwriting which looked like a barbed-wire railing. The contents were
as follows:--

"ENMORE PARK, W.

"SIR,--I have duly received your note, in which you claim to endorse my
views, although I am not aware that they are dependent upon endorsement
either from you or anyone else. You have ventured to use the word
'speculation' with regard to my statement upon the subject of
Darwinism, and I would call your attention to the fact that such a word
in such a connection is offensive to a degree. The context convinces
me, however, that you have sinned rather through ignorance and
tactlessness than through malice, so I am content to pass the matter
by. You quote an isolated sentence from my lecture, and appear to have
some difficulty in understanding it. I should have thought that only a
sub-human intelligence could have failed to grasp the point, but if it
really needs amplification I shall consent to see you at the hour
named, though visits and visitors of every sort are exceeding
distasteful to me. As to your suggestion that I may modify my opinion,
I would have you know that it is not my habit to do so after a
deliberate expression of my mature views. You will kindly show the
envelope of this letter to my man, Austin, when you call, as he has to
take every precaution to shield me from the intrusive rascals who call
themselves 'journalists.'

"Yours faithfully,
"GEORGE EDWARD CHALLENGER."

This was the letter that I read aloud to Tarp Henry, who had come down
early to hear the result of my venture. His only remark was, "There's
some new stuff, cuticura or something, which is better than arnica."
Some people have such extraordinary notions of humor.

It was nearly half-past ten before I had received my message, but a
taxicab took me round in good time for my appointment. It was an
imposing porticoed house at which we stopped, and the heavily-curtained
windows gave every indication of wealth upon the part of this
formidable Professor. The door was opened by an odd, swarthy, dried-up
person of uncertain age, with a dark pilot jacket and brown leather
gaiters. I found afterwards that he was the chauffeur, who filled the
gaps left by a succession of fugitive butlers. He looked me up and
down with a searching light blue eye.

"Expected?" he asked.

"An appointment."

"Got your letter?"

I produced the envelope.

"Right!" He seemed to be a person of few words. Following him down
the passage I was suddenly interrupted by a small woman, who stepped
out from what proved to be the dining-room door. She was a bright,
vivacious, dark-eyed lady, more French than English in her type.

"One moment," she said. "You can wait, Austin. Step in here, sir.
May I ask if you have met my husband before?"

"No, madam, I have not had the honor."

"Then I apologize to you in advance. I must tell you that he is a
perfectly impossible person--absolutely impossible. If you are
forewarned you will be the more ready to make allowances."

"It is most considerate of you, madam."

"Get quickly out of the room if he seems inclined to be violent. Don't
wait to argue with him. Several people have been injured through doing
that. Afterwards there is a public scandal and it reflects upon me and
all of us. I suppose it wasn't about South America you wanted to see
him?"

I could not lie to a lady.

"Dear me! That is his most dangerous subject. You won't believe a
word he says--I'm sure I don't wonder. But don't tell him so, for it
makes him very violent. Pretend to believe him, and you may get
through all right. Remember he believes it himself. Of that you may
be assured. A more honest man never lived. Don't wait any longer or
he may suspect. If you find him dangerous--really dangerous--ring the
bell and hold him off until I come. Even at his worst I can usually
control him."

With these encouraging words the lady handed me over to the taciturn
Austin, who had waited like a bronze statue of discretion during our
short interview, and I was conducted to the end of the passage. There
was a tap at a door, a bull's bellow from within, and I was face to
face with the Professor.

He sat in a rotating chair behind a broad table, which was covered with
books, maps, and diagrams. As I entered, his seat spun round to face
me. His appearance made me gasp. I was prepared for something
strange, but not for so overpowering a personality as this. It was his
size which took one's breath away--his size and his imposing presence.
His head was enormous, the largest I have ever seen upon a human being.
I am sure that his top-hat, had I ever ventured to don it, would have
slipped over me entirely and rested on my shoulders. He had the face
and beard which I associate with an Assyrian bull; the former florid,
the latter so black as almost to have a suspicion of blue, spade-shaped
and rippling down over his chest. The hair was peculiar, plastered
down in front in a long, curving wisp over his massive forehead. The
eyes were blue-gray under great black tufts, very clear, very critical,
and very masterful. A huge spread of shoulders and a chest like a
barrel were the other parts of him which appeared above the table, save
for two enormous hands covered with long black hair. This and a
bellowing, roaring, rumbling voice made up my first impression of the
notorious Professor Challenger.

"Well?" said he, with a most insolent stare. "What now?"

I must keep up my deception for at least a little time longer,
otherwise here was evidently an end of the interview.

"You were good enough to give me an appointment, sir," said I, humbly,
producing his envelope.

He took my letter from his desk and laid it out before him.

"Oh, you are the young person who cannot understand plain English, are
you? My general conclusions you are good enough to approve, as I
understand?"

"Entirely, sir--entirely!" I was very emphatic.

"Dear me! That strengthens my position very much, does it not? Your
age and appearance make your support doubly valuable. Well, at least
you are better than that herd of swine in Vienna, whose gregarious
grunt is, however, not more offensive than the isolated effort of the
British hog." He glared at me as the present representative of the
beast.

"They seem to have behaved abominably," said I.

"I assure you that I can fight my own battles, and that I have no
possible need of your sympathy. Put me alone, sir, and with my back to
the wall. G. E. C. is happiest then. Well, sir, let us do what we can
to curtail this visit, which can hardly be agreeable to you, and is
inexpressibly irksome to me. You had, as I have been led to believe,
some comments to make upon the proposition which I advanced in my
thesis."

There was a brutal directness about his methods which made evasion
difficult. I must still make play and wait for a better opening. It
had seemed simple enough at a distance. Oh, my Irish wits, could they
not help me now, when I needed help so sorely? He transfixed me with
two sharp, steely eyes. "Come, come!" he rumbled.

"I am, of course, a mere student," said I, with a fatuous smile,
"hardly more, I might say, than an earnest inquirer. At the same time,
it seemed to me that you were a little severe upon Weissmann in this
matter. Has not the general evidence since that date tended to--well,
to strengthen his position?"

"What evidence?" He spoke with a menacing calm.

"Well, of course, I am aware that there is not any what you might call
DEFINITE evidence. I alluded merely to the trend of modern thought and
the general scientific point of view, if I might so express it."

He leaned forward with great earnestness.

"I suppose you are aware," said he, checking off points upon his
fingers, "that the cranial index is a constant factor?"

"Naturally," said I.

"And that telegony is still sub judice?"

"Undoubtedly."

"And that the germ plasm is different from the parthenogenetic egg?"

"Why, surely!" I cried, and gloried in my own audacity.

"But what does that prove?" he asked, in a gentle, persuasive voice.

"Ah, what indeed?" I murmured. "What does it prove?"

"Shall I tell you?" he cooed.

"Pray do."

"It proves," he roared, with a sudden blast of fury, "that you are the
damnedest imposter in London--a vile, crawling journalist, who has no
more science than he has decency in his composition!"

He had sprung to his feet with a mad rage in his eyes. Even at that
moment of tension I found time for amazement at the discovery that he
was quite a short man, his head not higher than my shoulder--a stunted
Hercules whose tremendous vitality had all run to depth, breadth, and
brain.

"Gibberish!" he cried, leaning forward, with his fingers on the table
and his face projecting. "That's what I have been talking to you,
sir--scientific gibberish! Did you think you could match cunning with
me--you with your walnut of a brain? You think you are omnipotent, you
infernal scribblers, don't you? That your praise can make a man and
your blame can break him? We must all bow to you, and try to get a
favorable word, must we? This man shall have a leg up, and this man
shall have a dressing down! Creeping vermin, I know you! You've got
out of your station. Time was when your ears were clipped. You've
lost your sense of proportion. Swollen gas-bags! I'll keep you in
your proper place. Yes, sir, you haven't got over G. E. C. There's
one man who is still your master. He warned you off, but if you WILL
come, by the Lord you do it at your own risk. Forfeit, my good Mr.
Malone, I claim forfeit! You have played a rather dangerous game, and
it strikes me that you have lost it."

"Look here, sir," said I, backing to the door and opening it; "you can
be as abusive as you like. But there is a limit. You shall not
assault me."

"Shall I not?" He was slowly advancing in a peculiarly menacing way,
but he stopped now and put his big hands into the side-pockets of a
rather boyish short jacket which he wore. "I have thrown several of
you out of the house. You will be the fourth or fifth. Three pound
fifteen each--that is how it averaged. Expensive, but very necessary.
Now, sir, why should you not follow your brethren? I rather think you
must." He resumed his unpleasant and stealthy advance, pointing his
toes as he walked, like a dancing master.

I could have bolted for the hall door, but it would have been too
ignominious. Besides, a little glow of righteous anger was springing
up within me. I had been hopelessly in the wrong before, but this
man's menaces were putting me in the right.

"I'll trouble you to keep your hands off, sir. I'll not stand it."

"Dear me!" His black moustache lifted and a white fang twinkled in a
sneer. "You won't stand it, eh?"

"Don't be such a fool, Professor!" I cried. "What can you hope for?
I'm fifteen stone, as hard as nails, and play center three-quarter
every Saturday for the London Irish. I'm not the man----"

It was at that moment that he rushed me. It was lucky that I had
opened the door, or we should have gone through it. We did a
Catharine-wheel together down the passage. Somehow we gathered up a
chair upon our way, and bounded on with it towards the street. My
mouth was full of his beard, our arms were locked, our bodies
intertwined, and that infernal chair radiated its legs all round us.
The watchful Austin had thrown open the hall door. We went with a back
somersault down the front steps. I have seen the two Macs attempt
something of the kind at the halls, but it appears to take some
practise to do it without hurting oneself. The chair went to matchwood
at the bottom, and we rolled apart into the gutter. He sprang to his
feet, waving his fists and wheezing like an asthmatic.

"Had enough?" he panted.

"You infernal bully!" I cried, as I gathered myself together.

Then and there we should have tried the thing out, for he was
effervescing with fight, but fortunately I was rescued from an odious
situation. A policeman was beside us, his notebook in his hand.

"What's all this? You ought to be ashamed" said the policeman. It was
the most rational remark which I had heard in Enmore Park. "Well," he
insisted, turning to me, "what is it, then?"

"This man attacked me," said I.

"Did you attack him?" asked the policeman.

The Professor breathed hard and said nothing.

"It's not the first time, either," said the policeman, severely,
shaking his head. "You were in trouble last month for the same thing.
You've blackened this young man's eye. Do you give him in charge, sir?"

I relented.

"No," said I, "I do not."

"What's that?" said the policeman.

"I was to blame myself. I intruded upon him. He gave me fair warning."

The policeman snapped up his notebook.

"Don't let us have any more such goings-on," said he. "Now, then!
Move on, there, move on!" This to a butcher's boy, a maid, and one or
two loafers who had collected. He clumped heavily down the street,
driving this little flock before him. The Professor looked at me, and
there was something humorous at the back of his eyes.

"Come in!" said he. "I've not done with you yet."

The speech had a sinister sound, but I followed him none the less into
the house. The man-servant, Austin, like a wooden image, closed the
door behind us.

CHAPTER IV

"It's Just the very Biggest Thing in the World"

Hardly was it shut when Mrs. Challenger darted out from the
dining-room. The small woman was in a furious temper. She barred her
husband's way like an enraged chicken in front of a bulldog. It was
evident that she had seen my exit, but had not observed my return.

"You brute, George!" she screamed. "You've hurt that nice young man."

He jerked backwards with his thumb.

"Here he is, safe and sound behind me."

She was confused, but not unduly so.

"I am so sorry, I didn't see you."

"I assure you, madam, that it is all right."

"He has marked your poor face! Oh, George, what a brute you are!
Nothing but scandals from one end of the week to the other. Everyone
hating and making fun of you. You've finished my patience. This ends
it."

"Dirty linen," he rumbled.

"It's not a secret," she cried. "Do you suppose that the whole
street--the whole of London, for that matter---- Get away, Austin, we
don't want you here. Do you suppose they don't all talk about you?
Where is your dignity? You, a man who should have been Regius
Professor at a great University with a thousand students all revering
you. Where is your dignity, George?"

"How about yours, my dear?"

"You try me too much. A ruffian--a common brawling ruffian--that's
what you have become."

"Be good, Jessie."

"A roaring, raging bully!"

"That's done it! Stool of penance!" said he.

To my amazement he stooped, picked her up, and placed her sitting upon
a high pedestal of black marble in the angle of the hall. It was at
least seven feet high, and so thin that she could hardly balance upon
it. A more absurd object than she presented cocked up there with her
face convulsed with anger, her feet dangling, and her body rigid for
fear of an upset, I could not imagine.

"Let me down!" she wailed.

"Say 'please.'"

"You brute, George! Let me down this instant!"

"Come into the study, Mr. Malone."

"Really, sir----!" said I, looking at the lady.

"Here's Mr. Malone pleading for you, Jessie. Say 'please,' and down
you come."

"Oh, you brute! Please! please!"

He took her down as if she had been a canary.

"You must behave yourself, dear. Mr. Malone is a Pressman. He will
have it all in his rag to-morrow, and sell an extra dozen among our
neighbors. 'Strange story of high life'--you felt fairly high on that
pedestal, did you not? Then a sub-title, 'Glimpse of a singular
menage.' He's a foul feeder, is Mr. Malone, a carrion eater, like all
of his kind--porcus ex grege diaboli--a swine from the devil's herd.
That's it, Malone--what?"

"You are really intolerable!" said I, hotly.

He bellowed with laughter.

"We shall have a coalition presently," he boomed, looking from his wife
to me and puffing out his enormous chest. Then, suddenly altering his
tone, "Excuse this frivolous family badinage, Mr. Malone. I called you
back for some more serious purpose than to mix you up with our little
domestic pleasantries. Run away, little woman, and don't fret." He
placed a huge hand upon each of her shoulders. "All that you say is
perfectly true. I should be a better man if I did what you advise, but
I shouldn't be quite George Edward Challenger. There are plenty of
better men, my dear, but only one G. E. C. So make the best of him."
He suddenly gave her a resounding kiss, which embarrassed me even more
than his violence had done. "Now, Mr. Malone," he continued, with a
great accession of dignity, "this way, if YOU please."

We re-entered the room which we had left so tumultuously ten minutes
before. The Professor closed the door carefully behind us, motioned me
into an arm-chair, and pushed a cigar-box under my nose.

"Real San Juan Colorado," he said. "Excitable people like you are the
better for narcotics. Heavens! don't bite it! Cut--and cut with
reverence! Now lean back, and listen attentively to whatever I may
care to say to you. If any remark should occur to you, you can reserve
it for some more opportune time.

"First of all, as to your return to my house after your most
justifiable expulsion"--he protruded his beard, and stared at me as one
who challenges and invites contradiction--"after, as I say, your
well-merited expulsion. The reason lay in your answer to that most
officious policeman, in which I seemed to discern some glimmering of
good feeling upon your part--more, at any rate, than I am accustomed to
associate with your profession. In admitting that the fault of the
incident lay with you, you gave some evidence of a certain mental
detachment and breadth of view which attracted my favorable notice.
The sub-species of the human race to which you unfortunately belong has
always been below my mental horizon. Your words brought you suddenly
above it. You swam up into my serious notice. For this reason I asked
you to return with me, as I was minded to make your further
acquaintance. You will kindly deposit your ash in the small Japanese
tray on the bamboo table which stands at your left elbow."

All this he boomed forth like a professor addressing his class. He had
swung round his revolving chair so as to face me, and he sat all puffed
out like an enormous bull-frog, his head laid back and his eyes
half-covered by supercilious lids. Now he suddenly turned himself
sideways, and all I could see of him was tangled hair with a red,
protruding ear. He was scratching about among the litter of papers
upon his desk. He faced me presently with what looked like a very
tattered sketch-book in his hand.

"I am going to talk to you about South America," said he. "No comments
if you please. First of all, I wish you to understand that nothing I
tell you now is to be repeated in any public way unless you have my
express permission. That permission will, in all human probability,
never be given. Is that clear?"

"It is very hard," said I. "Surely a judicious account----"

He replaced the notebook upon the table.

"That ends it," said he. "I wish you a very good morning."

"No, no!" I cried. "I submit to any conditions. So far as I can see,
I have no choice."

"None in the world," said he.

"Well, then, I promise."

"Word of honor?"

"Word of honor."

He looked at me with doubt in his insolent eyes.

"After all, what do I know about your honor?" said he.

"Upon my word, sir," I cried, angrily, "you take very great liberties!
I have never been so insulted in my life."

He seemed more interested than annoyed at my outbreak.

"Round-headed," he muttered. "Brachycephalic, gray-eyed, black-haired,
with suggestion of the negroid. Celtic, I presume?"

"I am an Irishman, sir."

"Irish Irish?"

"Yes, sir."

"That, of course, explains it. Let me see; you have given me your
promise that my confidence will be respected? That confidence, I may
say, will be far from complete. But I am prepared to give you a few
indications which will be of interest. In the first place, you are
probably aware that two years ago I made a journey to South
America--one which will be classical in the scientific history of the
world? The object of my journey was to verify some conclusions of
Wallace and of Bates, which could only be done by observing their
reported facts under the same conditions in which they had themselves
noted them. If my expedition had no other results it would still have
been noteworthy, but a curious incident occurred to me while there
which opened up an entirely fresh line of inquiry.

"You are aware--or probably, in this half-educated age, you are not
aware--that the country round some parts of the Amazon is still only
partially explored, and that a great number of tributaries, some of
them entirely uncharted, run into the main river. It was my business
to visit this little-known back-country and to examine its fauna, which
furnished me with the materials for several chapters for that great and
monumental work upon zoology which will be my life's justification. I
was returning, my work accomplished, when I had occasion to spend a
night at a small Indian village at a point where a certain
tributary--the name and position of which I withhold--opens into the
main river. The natives were Cucama Indians, an amiable but degraded
race, with mental powers hardly superior to the average Londoner. I
had effected some cures among them upon my way up the river, and had
impressed them considerably with my personality, so that I was not
surprised to find myself eagerly awaited upon my return. I gathered
from their signs that someone had urgent need of my medical services,
and I followed the chief to one of his huts. When I entered I found
that the sufferer to whose aid I had been summoned had that instant
expired. He was, to my surprise, no Indian, but a white man; indeed, I
may say a very white man, for he was flaxen-haired and had some
characteristics of an albino. He was clad in rags, was very emaciated,
and bore every trace of prolonged hardship. So far as I could
understand the account of the natives, he was a complete stranger to
them, and had come upon their village through the woods alone and in
the last stage of exhaustion.

"The man's knapsack lay beside the couch, and I examined the contents.
His name was written upon a tab within it--Maple White, Lake Avenue,
Detroit, Michigan. It is a name to which I am prepared always to lift
my hat. It is not too much to say that it will rank level with my own
when the final credit of this business comes to be apportioned.

"From the contents of the knapsack it was evident that this man had
been an artist and poet in search of effects. There were scraps of
verse. I do not profess to be a judge of such things, but they
appeared to me to be singularly wanting in merit. There were also some
rather commonplace pictures of river scenery, a paint-box, a box of
colored chalks, some brushes, that curved bone which lies upon my
inkstand, a volume of Baxter's 'Moths and Butterflies,' a cheap
revolver, and a few cartridges. Of personal equipment he either had
none or he had lost it in his journey. Such were the total effects of
this strange American Bohemian.

"I was turning away from him when I observed that something projected
from the front of his ragged jacket. It was this sketch-book, which
was as dilapidated then as you see it now. Indeed, I can assure you
that a first folio of Shakespeare could not be treated with greater
reverence than this relic has been since it came into my possession. I
hand it to you now, and I ask you to take it page by page and to
examine the contents."

He helped himself to a cigar and leaned back with a fiercely critical
pair of eyes, taking note of the effect which this document would
produce.

I had opened the volume with some expectation of a revelation, though
of what nature I could not imagine. The first page was disappointing,
however, as it contained nothing but the picture of a very fat man in a
pea-jacket, with the legend, "Jimmy Colver on the Mail-boat," written
beneath it. There followed several pages which were filled with small
sketches of Indians and their ways. Then came a picture of a cheerful
and corpulent ecclesiastic in a shovel hat, sitting opposite a very
thin European, and the inscription: "Lunch with Fra Cristofero at
Rosario." Studies of women and babies accounted for several more
pages, and then there was an unbroken series of animal drawings with
such explanations as "Manatee upon Sandbank," "Turtles and Their Eggs,"
"Black Ajouti under a Miriti Palm"--the matter disclosing some sort of
pig-like animal; and finally came a double page of studies of
long-snouted and very unpleasant saurians. I could make nothing of it,
and said so to the Professor.

"Surely these are only crocodiles?"

"Alligators! Alligators! There is hardly such a thing as a true
crocodile in South America. The distinction between them----"

"I meant that I could see nothing unusual--nothing to justify what you
have said."

He smiled serenely.

"Try the next page," said he.

I was still unable to sympathize. It was a full-page sketch of a
landscape roughly tinted in color--the kind of painting which an
open-air artist takes as a guide to a future more elaborate effort.
There was a pale-green foreground of feathery vegetation, which sloped
upwards and ended in a line of cliffs dark red in color, and curiously
ribbed like some basaltic formations which I have seen. They extended
in an unbroken wall right across the background. At one point was an
isolated pyramidal rock, crowned by a great tree, which appeared to be
separated by a cleft from the main crag. Behind it all, a blue
tropical sky. A thin green line of vegetation fringed the summit of
the ruddy cliff.

"Well?" he asked.

"It is no doubt a curious formation," said I "but I am not geologist
enough to say that it is wonderful."

"Wonderful!" he repeated. "It is unique. It is incredible. No one on
earth has ever dreamed of such a possibility. Now the next."

I turned it over, and gave an exclamation of surprise. There was a
full-page picture of the most extraordinary creature that I had ever
seen. It was the wild dream of an opium smoker, a vision of delirium.
The head was like that of a fowl, the body that of a bloated lizard,
the trailing tail was furnished with upward-turned spikes, and the
curved back was edged with a high serrated fringe, which looked like a
dozen cocks' wattles placed behind each other. In front of this
creature was an absurd mannikin, or dwarf, in human form, who stood
staring at it.

"Well, what do you think of that?" cried the Professor, rubbing his
hands with an air of triumph.

"It is monstrous--grotesque."

"But what made him draw such an animal?"

"Trade gin, I should think."

"Oh, that's the best explanation you can give, is it?"

"Well, sir, what is yours?"

"The obvious one that the creature exists. That is actually sketched
from the life."

I should have laughed only that I had a vision of our doing another
Catharine-wheel down the passage.

"No doubt," said I, "no doubt," as one humors an imbecile. "I confess,
however," I added, "that this tiny human figure puzzles me. If it were
an Indian we could set it down as evidence of some pigmy race in
America, but it appears to be a European in a sun-hat."

The Professor snorted like an angry buffalo. "You really touch the
limit," said he. "You enlarge my view of the possible. Cerebral
paresis! Mental inertia! Wonderful!"

He was too absurd to make me angry. Indeed, it was a waste of energy,
for if you were going to be angry with this man you would be angry all
the time. I contented myself with smiling wearily. "It struck me that
the man was small," said I.

"Look here!" he cried, leaning forward and dabbing a great hairy
sausage of a finger on to the picture. "You see that plant behind the
animal; I suppose you thought it was a dandelion or a Brussels
sprout--what? Well, it is a vegetable ivory palm, and they run to
about fifty or sixty feet. Don't you see that the man is put in for a
purpose? He couldn't really have stood in front of that brute and
lived to draw it. He sketched himself in to give a scale of heights.
He was, we will say, over five feet high. The tree is ten times
bigger, which is what one would expect."

"Good heavens!" I cried. "Then you think the beast was---- Why,
Charing Cross station would hardly make a kennel for such a brute!"

"Apart from exaggeration, he is certainly a well-grown specimen," said
the Professor, complacently.

"But," I cried, "surely the whole experience of the human race is not
to be set aside on account of a single sketch"--I had turned over the
leaves and ascertained that there was nothing more in the book--"a
single sketch by a wandering American artist who may have done it under
hashish, or in the delirium of fever, or simply in order to gratify a
freakish imagination. You can't, as a man of science, defend such a
position as that."

For answer the Professor took a book down from a shelf.

"This is an excellent monograph by my gifted friend, Ray Lankester!"
said he. "There is an illustration here which would interest you. Ah,
yes, here it is! The inscription beneath it runs: 'Probable
appearance in life of the Jurassic Dinosaur Stegosaurus. The hind leg
alone is twice as tall as a full-grown man.' Well, what do you make of
that?"

He handed me the open book. I started as I looked at the picture. In
this reconstructed animal of a dead world there was certainly a very
great resemblance to the sketch of the unknown artist.

"That is certainly remarkable," said I.

"But you won't admit that it is final?"

"Surely it might be a coincidence, or this American may have seen a
picture of the kind and carried it in his memory. It would be likely
to recur to a man in a delirium."

"Very good," said the Professor, indulgently; "we leave it at that. I
will now ask you to look at this bone." He handed over the one which he
had already described as part of the dead man's possessions. It was
about six inches long, and thicker than my thumb, with some indications
of dried cartilage at one end of it.

"To what known creature does that bone belong?" asked the Professor.

I examined it with care and tried to recall some half-forgotten
knowledge.

"It might be a very thick human collar-bone," I said.

My companion waved his hand in contemptuous deprecation.

"The human collar-bone is curved. This is straight. There is a groove
upon its surface showing that a great tendon played across it, which
could not be the case with a clavicle."

"Then I must confess that I don't know what it is."

"You need not be ashamed to expose your ignorance, for I don't suppose
the whole South Kensington staff could give a name to it." He took a
little bone the size of a bean out of a pill-box. "So far as I am a
judge this human bone is the analogue of the one which you hold in your
hand. That will give you some idea of the size of the creature. You
will observe from the cartilage that this is no fossil specimen, but
recent. What do you say to that?"

"Surely in an elephant----"

He winced as if in pain.

"Don't! Don't talk of elephants in South America. Even in these days
of Board schools----"

"Well," I interrupted, "any large South American animal--a tapir, for
example."

"You may take it, young man, that I am versed in the elements of my
business. This is not a conceivable bone either of a tapir or of any
other creature known to zoology. It belongs to a very large, a very
strong, and, by all analogy, a very fierce animal which exists upon the
face of the earth, but has not yet come under the notice of science.
You are still unconvinced?"

"I am at least deeply interested."

"Then your case is not hopeless. I feel that there is reason lurking
in you somewhere, so we will patiently grope round for it. We will now
leave the dead American and proceed with my narrative. You can imagine
that I could hardly come away from the Amazon without probing deeper
into the matter. There were indications as to the direction from which
the dead traveler had come. Indian legends would alone have been my
guide, for I found that rumors of a strange land were common among all
the riverine tribes. You have heard, no doubt, of Curupuri?"

"Never."

"Curupuri is the spirit of the woods, something terrible, something
malevolent, something to be avoided. None can describe its shape or
nature, but it is a word of terror along the Amazon. Now all tribes
agree as to the direction in which Curupuri lives. It was the same
direction from which the American had come. Something terrible lay
that way. It was my business to find out what it was."

"What did you do?" My flippancy was all gone. This massive man
compelled one's attention and respect.

"I overcame the extreme reluctance of the natives--a reluctance which
extends even to talk upon the subject--and by judicious persuasion and
gifts, aided, I will admit, by some threats of coercion, I got two of
them to act as guides. After many adventures which I need not
describe, and after traveling a distance which I will not mention, in a
direction which I withhold, we came at last to a tract of country which
has never been described, nor, indeed, visited save by my unfortunate
predecessor. Would you kindly look at this?"

He handed me a photograph--half-plate size.

"The unsatisfactory appearance of it is due to the fact," said he,
"that on descending the river the boat was upset and the case which
contained the undeveloped films was broken, with disastrous results.
Nearly all of them were totally ruined--an irreparable loss. This is
one of the few which partially escaped. This explanation of
deficiencies or abnormalities you will kindly accept. There was talk
of faking. I am not in a mood to argue such a point."

The photograph was certainly very off-colored. An unkind critic might
easily have misinterpreted that dim surface. It was a dull gray
landscape, and as I gradually deciphered the details of it I realized
that it represented a long and enormously high line of cliffs exactly
like an immense cataract seen in the distance, with a sloping,
tree-clad plain in the foreground.

"I believe it is the same place as the painted picture," said I.

"It is the same place," the Professor answered. "I found traces of the
fellow's camp. Now look at this."

It was a nearer view of the same scene, though the photograph was
extremely defective. I could distinctly see the isolated, tree-crowned
pinnacle of rock which was detached from the crag.

"I have no doubt of it at all," said I.

"Well, that is something gained," said he. "We progress, do we not?
Now, will you please look at the top of that rocky pinnacle? Do you
observe something there?"

"An enormous tree."

"But on the tree?"

"A large bird," said I.

He handed me a lens.

"Yes," I said, peering through it, "a large bird stands on the tree.
It appears to have a considerable beak. I should say it was a pelican."

"I cannot congratulate you upon your eyesight," said the Professor.
"It is not a pelican, nor, indeed, is it a bird. It may interest you
to know that I succeeded in shooting that particular specimen. It was
the only absolute proof of my experiences which I was able to bring
away with me."

"You have it, then?" Here at last was tangible corroboration.

"I had it. It was unfortunately lost with so much else in the same
boat accident which ruined my photographs. I clutched at it as it
disappeared in the swirl of the rapids, and part of its wing was left
in my hand. I was insensible when washed ashore, but the miserable
remnant of my superb specimen was still intact; I now lay it before
you."

From a drawer he produced what seemed to me to be the upper portion of
the wing of a large bat. It was at least two feet in length, a curved
bone, with a membranous veil beneath it.

"A monstrous bat!" I suggested.

"Nothing of the sort," said the Professor, severely. "Living, as I do,
in an educated and scientific atmosphere, I could not have conceived
that the first principles of zoology were so little known. Is it
possible that you do not know the elementary fact in comparative
anatomy, that the wing of a bird is really the forearm, while the wing
of a bat consists of three elongated fingers with membranes between?
Now, in this case, the bone is certainly not the forearm, and you can
see for yourself that this is a single membrane hanging upon a single
bone, and therefore that it cannot belong to a bat. But if it is
neither bird nor bat, what is it?"

My small stock of knowledge was exhausted.

"I really do not know," said I.

He opened the standard work to which he had already referred me.

"Here," said he, pointing to the picture of an extraordinary flying
monster, "is an excellent reproduction of the dimorphodon, or
pterodactyl, a flying reptile of the Jurassic period. On the next page
is a diagram of the mechanism of its wing. Kindly compare it with the
specimen in your hand."

A wave of amazement passed over me as I looked. I was convinced.
There could be no getting away from it. The cumulative proof was
overwhelming. The sketch, the photographs, the narrative, and now the
actual specimen--the evidence was complete. I said so--I said so
warmly, for I felt that the Professor was an ill-used man. He leaned
back in his chair with drooping eyelids and a tolerant smile, basking
in this sudden gleam of sunshine.

"It's just the very biggest thing that I ever heard of!" said I, though
it was my journalistic rather than my scientific enthusiasm that was
roused. "It is colossal. You are a Columbus of science who has
discovered a lost world. I'm awfully sorry if I seemed to doubt you.
It was all so unthinkable. But I understand evidence when I see it,
and this should be good enough for anyone."

The Professor purred with satisfaction.

"And then, sir, what did you do next?"

"It was the wet season, Mr. Malone, and my stores were exhausted. I
explored some portion of this huge cliff, but I was unable to find any
way to scale it. The pyramidal rock upon which I saw and shot the
pterodactyl was more accessible. Being something of a cragsman, I did
manage to get half way to the top of that. From that height I had a
better idea of the plateau upon the top of the crags. It appeared to
be very large; neither to east nor to west could I see any end to the
vista of green-capped cliffs. Below, it is a swampy, jungly region,
full of snakes, insects, and fever. It is a natural protection to this
singular country."

"Did you see any other trace of life?"

"No, sir, I did not; but during the week that we lay encamped at the
base of the cliff we heard some very strange noises from above."

"But the creature that the American drew? How do you account for that?"

"We can only suppose that he must have made his way to the summit and
seen it there. We know, therefore, that there is a way up. We know
equally that it must be a very difficult one, otherwise the creatures
would have come down and overrun the surrounding country. Surely that
is clear?"

"But how did they come to be there?"

"I do not think that the problem is a very obscure one," said the
Professor; "there can only be one explanation. South America is, as
you may have heard, a granite continent. At this single point in the
interior there has been, in some far distant age, a great, sudden
volcanic upheaval. These cliffs, I may remark, are basaltic, and
therefore plutonic. An area, as large perhaps as Sussex, has been
lifted up en bloc with all its living contents, and cut off by
perpendicular precipices of a hardness which defies erosion from all
the rest of the continent. What is the result? Why, the ordinary laws
of Nature are suspended. The various checks which influence the
struggle for existence in the world at large are all neutralized or
altered. Creatures survive which would otherwise disappear. You will
observe that both the pterodactyl and the stegosaurus are Jurassic, and
therefore of a great age in the order of life. They have been
artificially conserved by those strange accidental conditions."

"But surely your evidence is conclusive. You have only to lay it
before the proper authorities."

"So in my simplicity, I had imagined," said the Professor, bitterly.
"I can only tell you that it was not so, that I was met at every turn
by incredulity, born partly of stupidity and partly of jealousy. It is
not my nature, sir, to cringe to any man, or to seek to prove a fact if
my word has been doubted. After the first I have not condescended to
show such corroborative proofs as I possess. The subject became
hateful to me--I would not speak of it. When men like yourself, who
represent the foolish curiosity of the public, came to disturb my
privacy I was unable to meet them with dignified reserve. By nature I
am, I admit, somewhat fiery, and under provocation I am inclined to be
violent. I fear you may have remarked it."

I nursed my eye and was silent.

"My wife has frequently remonstrated with me upon the subject, and yet
I fancy that any man of honor would feel the same. To-night, however,
I propose to give an extreme example of the control of the will over
the emotions. I invite you to be present at the exhibition." He
handed me a card from his desk. "You will perceive that Mr. Percival
Waldron, a naturalist of some popular repute, is announced to lecture
at eight-thirty at the Zoological Institute's Hall upon 'The Record of
the Ages.' I have been specially invited to be present upon the
platform, and to move a vote of thanks to the lecturer. While doing
so, I shall make it my business, with infinite tact and delicacy, to
throw out a few remarks which may arouse the interest of the audience
and cause some of them to desire to go more deeply into the matter.
Nothing contentious, you understand, but only an indication that there
are greater deeps beyond. I shall hold myself strongly in leash, and
see whether by this self-restraint I attain a more favorable result."

"And I may come?" I asked eagerly.

"Why, surely," he answered, cordially. He had an enormously massive
genial manner, which was almost as overpowering as his violence. His
smile of benevolence was a wonderful thing, when his cheeks would
suddenly bunch into two red apples, between his half-closed eyes and
his great black beard. "By all means, come. It will be a comfort to
me to know that I have one ally in the hall, however inefficient and
ignorant of the subject he may be. I fancy there will be a large
audience, for Waldron, though an absolute charlatan, has a considerable
popular following. Now, Mr. Malone, I have given you rather more of my
time than I had intended. The individual must not monopolize what is
meant for the world. I shall be pleased to see you at the lecture
to-night. In the meantime, you will understand that no public use is
to be made of any of the material that I have given you."

"But Mr. McArdle--my news editor, you know--will want to know what I
have done."

"Tell him what you like. You can say, among other things, that if he
sends anyone else to intrude upon me I shall call upon him with a
riding-whip. But I leave it to you that nothing of all this appears in
print. Very good. Then the Zoological Institute's Hall at
eight-thirty to-night." I had a last impression of red cheeks, blue
rippling beard, and intolerant eyes, as he waved me out of the room.

CHAPTER V

"Question!"

What with the physical shocks incidental to my first interview with
Professor Challenger and the mental ones which accompanied the second,
I was a somewhat demoralized journalist by the time I found myself in
Enmore Park once more. In my aching head the one thought was throbbing
that there really was truth in this man's story, that it was of
tremendous consequence, and that it would work up into inconceivable
copy for the Gazette when I could obtain permission to use it. A
taxicab was waiting at the end of the road, so I sprang into it and
drove down to the office. McArdle was at his post as usual.

"Well," he cried, expectantly, "what may it run to? I'm thinking,
young man, you have been in the wars. Don't tell me that he assaulted
you."

"We had a little difference at first."

"What a man it is! What did you do?"

"Well, he became more reasonable and we had a chat. But I got nothing
out of him--nothing for publication."

"I'm not so sure about that. You got a black eye out of him, and
that's for publication. We can't have this reign of terror, Mr.
Malone. We must bring the man to his bearings. I'll have a leaderette
on him to-morrow that will raise a blister. Just give me the material
and I will engage to brand the fellow for ever. Professor
Munchausen--how's that for an inset headline? Sir John Mandeville
redivivus--Cagliostro--all the imposters and bullies in history. I'll
show him up for the fraud he is."

"I wouldn't do that, sir."

"Why not?"

"Because he is not a fraud at all."

"What!" roared McArdle. "You don't mean to say you really believe this
stuff of his about mammoths and mastodons and great sea sairpents?"

"Well, I don't know about that. I don't think he makes any claims of
that kind. But I do believe he has got something new."

"Then for Heaven's sake, man, write it up!"

"I'm longing to, but all I know he gave me in confidence and on
condition that I didn't." I condensed into a few sentences the
Professor's narrative. "That's how it stands."

McArdle looked deeply incredulous.

"Well, Mr. Malone," he said at last, "about this scientific meeting
to-night; there can be no privacy about that, anyhow. I don't suppose
any paper will want to report it, for Waldron has been reported already
a dozen times, and no one is aware that Challenger will speak. We may
get a scoop, if we are lucky. You'll be there in any case, so you'll
just give us a pretty full report. I'll keep space up to midnight."

My day was a busy one, and I had an early dinner at the Savage Club
with Tarp Henry, to whom I gave some account of my adventures. He
listened with a sceptical smile on his gaunt face, and roared with
laughter on hearing that the Professor had convinced me.

"My dear chap, things don't happen like that in real life. People
don't stumble upon enormous discoveries and then lose their evidence.
Leave that to the novelists. The fellow is as full of tricks as the
monkey-house at the Zoo. It's all bosh."

"But the American poet?"

"He never existed."

"I saw his sketch-book."

"Challenger's sketch-book."

"You think he drew that animal?"

"Of course he did. Who else?"

"Well, then, the photographs?"

"There was nothing in the photographs. By your own admission you only
saw a bird."

"A pterodactyl."

"That's what HE says. He put the pterodactyl into your head."

"Well, then, the bones?"

"First one out of an Irish stew. Second one vamped up for the
occasion. If you are clever and know your business you can fake a bone
as easily as you can a photograph."

I began to feel uneasy. Perhaps, after all, I had been premature in my
acquiescence. Then I had a sudden happy thought.

"Will you come to the meeting?" I asked.

Tarp Henry looked thoughtful.

"He is not a popular person, the genial Challenger," said he. "A lot
of people have accounts to settle with him. I should say he is about
the best-hated man in London. If the medical students turn out there
will be no end of a rag. I don't want to get into a bear-garden."

"You might at least do him the justice to hear him state his own case."

"Well, perhaps it's only fair. All right. I'm your man for the
evening."

When we arrived at the hall we found a much greater concourse than I
had expected. A line of electric broughams discharged their little
cargoes of white-bearded professors, while the dark stream of humbler
pedestrians, who crowded through the arched door-way, showed that the
audience would be popular as well as scientific. Indeed, it became
evident to us as soon as we had taken our seats that a youthful and
even boyish spirit was abroad in the gallery and the back portions of
the hall. Looking behind me, I could see rows of faces of the familiar
medical student type. Apparently the great hospitals had each sent
down their contingent. The behavior of the audience at present was
good-humored, but mischievous. Scraps of popular songs were chorused
with an enthusiasm which was a strange prelude to a scientific lecture,
and there was already a tendency to personal chaff which promised a
jovial evening to others, however embarrassing it might be to the
recipients of these dubious honors.

Thus, when old Doctor Meldrum, with his well-known curly-brimmed
opera-hat, appeared upon the platform, there was such a universal query
of "Where DID you get that tile?" that he hurriedly removed it, and
concealed it furtively under his chair. When gouty Professor Wadley
limped down to his seat there were general affectionate inquiries from
all parts of the hall as to the exact state of his poor toe, which
caused him obvious embarrassment. The greatest demonstration of all,
however, was at the entrance of my new acquaintance, Professor
Challenger, when he passed down to take his place at the extreme end of
the front row of the platform. Such a yell of welcome broke forth when
his black beard first protruded round the corner that I began to
suspect Tarp Henry was right in his surmise, and that this assemblage
was there not merely for the sake of the lecture, but because it had
got rumored abroad that the famous Professor would take part in the
proceedings.

There was some sympathetic laughter on his entrance among the front
benches of well-dressed spectators, as though the demonstration of the
students in this instance was not unwelcome to them. That greeting
was, indeed, a frightful outburst of sound, the uproar of the carnivora
cage when the step of the bucket-bearing keeper is heard in the
distance. There was an offensive tone in it, perhaps, and yet in the
main it struck me as mere riotous outcry, the noisy reception of one
who amused and interested them, rather than of one they disliked or
despised. Challenger smiled with weary and tolerant contempt, as a
kindly man would meet the yapping of a litter of puppies. He sat
slowly down, blew out his chest, passed his hand caressingly down his
beard, and looked with drooping eyelids and supercilious eyes at the
crowded hall before him. The uproar of his advent had not yet died
away when Professor Ronald Murray, the chairman, and Mr. Waldron, the
lecturer, threaded their way to the front, and the proceedings began.

Professor Murray will, I am sure, excuse me if I say that he has the
common fault of most Englishmen of being inaudible. Why on earth
people who have something to say which is worth hearing should not take
the slight trouble to learn how to make it heard is one of the strange
mysteries of modern life. Their methods are as reasonable as to try to
pour some precious stuff from the spring to the reservoir through a
non-conducting pipe, which could by the least effort be opened.
Professor Murray made several profound remarks to his white tie and to
the water-carafe upon the table, with a humorous, twinkling aside to
the silver candlestick upon his right. Then he sat down, and Mr.
Waldron, the famous popular lecturer, rose amid a general murmur of
applause. He was a stern, gaunt man, with a harsh voice, and an
aggressive manner, but he had the merit of knowing how to assimilate
the ideas of other men, and to pass them on in a way which was
intelligible and even interesting to the lay public, with a happy knack
of being funny about the most unlikely objects, so that the precession
of the Equinox or the formation of a vertebrate became a highly
humorous process as treated by him.

It was a bird's-eye view of creation, as interpreted by science, which,
in language always clear and sometimes picturesque, he unfolded before
us. He told us of the globe, a huge mass of flaming gas, flaring
through the heavens. Then he pictured the solidification, the cooling,
the wrinkling which formed the mountains, the steam which turned to
water, the slow preparation of the stage upon which was to be played
the inexplicable drama of life. On the origin of life itself he was
discreetly vague. That the germs of it could hardly have survived the
original roasting was, he declared, fairly certain. Therefore it had
come later. Had it built itself out of the cooling, inorganic elements
of the globe? Very likely. Had the germs of it arrived from outside
upon a meteor? It was hardly conceivable. On the whole, the wisest
man was the least dogmatic upon the point. We could not--or at least
we had not succeeded up to date in making organic life in our
laboratories out of inorganic materials. The gulf between the dead and
the living was something which our chemistry could not as yet bridge.
But there was a higher and subtler chemistry of Nature, which, working
with great forces over long epochs, might well produce results which
were impossible for us. There the matter must be left.

This brought the lecturer to the great ladder of animal life, beginning
low down in molluscs and feeble sea creatures, then up rung by rung
through reptiles and fishes, till at last we came to a kangaroo-rat, a
creature which brought forth its young alive, the direct ancestor of
all mammals, and presumably, therefore, of everyone in the audience.
("No, no," from a sceptical student in the back row.) If the young
gentleman in the red tie who cried "No, no," and who presumably claimed
to have been hatched out of an egg, would wait upon him after the
lecture, he would be glad to see such a curiosity. (Laughter.) It was
strange to think that the climax of all the age-long process of Nature
had been the creation of that gentleman in the red tie. But had the
process stopped? Was this gentleman to be taken as the final type--the
be-all and end-all of development? He hoped that he would not hurt the
feelings of the gentleman in the red tie if he maintained that,
whatever virtues that gentleman might possess in private life, still
the vast processes of the universe were not fully justified if they
were to end entirely in his production. Evolution was not a spent
force, but one still working, and even greater achievements were in
store.

Having thus, amid a general titter, played very prettily with his
interrupter, the lecturer went back to his picture of the past, the
drying of the seas, the emergence of the sand-bank, the sluggish,
viscous life which lay upon their margins, the overcrowded lagoons, the
tendency of the sea creatures to take refuge upon the mud-flats, the
abundance of food awaiting them, their consequent enormous growth.
"Hence, ladies and gentlemen," he added, "that frightful brood of
saurians which still affright our eyes when seen in the Wealden or in
the Solenhofen slates, but which were fortunately extinct long before
the first appearance of mankind upon this planet."

"Question!" boomed a voice from the platform.

Mr. Waldron was a strict disciplinarian with a gift of acid humor, as
exemplified upon the gentleman with the red tie, which made it perilous
to interrupt him. But this interjection appeared to him so absurd that
he was at a loss how to deal with it. So looks the Shakespearean who
is confronted by a rancid Baconian, or the astronomer who is assailed
by a flat-earth fanatic. He paused for a moment, and then, raising his
voice, repeated slowly the words: "Which were extinct before the
coming of man."

"Question!" boomed the voice once more.

Waldron looked with amazement along the line of professors upon the
platform until his eyes fell upon the figure of Challenger, who leaned
back in his chair with closed eyes and an amused expression, as if he
were smiling in his sleep.

"I see!" said Waldron, with a shrug. "It is my friend Professor
Challenger," and amid laughter he renewed his lecture as if this was a
final explanation and no more need be said.

But the incident was far from being closed. Whatever path the lecturer
took amid the wilds of the past seemed invariably to lead him to some
assertion as to extinct or prehistoric life which instantly brought the
same bulls' bellow from the Professor. The audience began to
anticipate it and to roar with delight when it came. The packed
benches of students joined in, and every time Challenger's beard
opened, before any sound could come forth, there was a yell of
"Question!" from a hundred voices, and an answering counter cry of
"Order!" and "Shame!" from as many more. Waldron, though a hardened
lecturer and a strong man, became rattled. He hesitated, stammered,
repeated himself, got snarled in a long sentence, and finally turned
furiously upon the cause of his troubles.

"This is really intolerable!" he cried, glaring across the platform.
"I must ask you, Professor Challenger, to cease these ignorant and
unmannerly interruptions."

There was a hush over the hall, the students rigid with delight at
seeing the high gods on Olympus quarrelling among themselves.
Challenger levered his bulky figure slowly out of his chair.

"I must in turn ask you, Mr. Waldron," he said, "to cease to make
assertions which are not in strict accordance with scientific fact."

The words unloosed a tempest. "Shame! Shame!" "Give him a hearing!"
"Put him out!" "Shove him off the platform!" "Fair play!" emerged
from a general roar of amusement or execration. The chairman was on
his feet flapping both his hands and bleating excitedly. "Professor
Challenger--personal--views--later," were the solid peaks above his
clouds of inaudible mutter. The interrupter bowed, smiled, stroked his
beard, and relapsed into his chair. Waldron, very flushed and warlike,
continued his observations. Now and then, as he made an assertion, he
shot a venomous glance at his opponent, who seemed to be slumbering
deeply, with the same broad, happy smile upon his face.

At last the lecture came to an end--I am inclined to think that it was
a premature one, as the peroration was hurried and disconnected. The
thread of the argument had been rudely broken, and the audience was
restless and expectant. Waldron sat down, and, after a chirrup from
the chairman, Professor Challenger rose and advanced to the edge of the
platform. In the interests of my paper I took down his speech verbatim.

"Ladies and Gentlemen," he began, amid a sustained interruption from
the back. "I beg pardon--Ladies, Gentlemen, and Children--I must
apologize, I had inadvertently omitted a considerable section of this
audience" (tumult, during which the Professor stood with one hand
raised and his enormous head nodding sympathetically, as if he were
bestowing a pontifical blessing upon the crowd), "I have been selected
to move a vote of thanks to Mr. Waldron for the very picturesque and
imaginative address to which we have just listened. There are points
in it with which I disagree, and it has been my duty to indicate them
as they arose, but, none the less, Mr. Waldron has accomplished his
object well, that object being to give a simple and interesting account
of what he conceives to have been the history of our planet. Popular
lectures are the easiest to listen to, but Mr. Waldron" (here he beamed
and blinked at the lecturer) "will excuse me when I say that they are
necessarily both superficial and misleading, since they have to be
graded to the comprehension of an ignorant audience." (Ironical
cheering.) "Popular lecturers are in their nature parasitic." (Angry
gesture of protest from Mr. Waldron.) "They exploit for fame or cash
the work which has been done by their indigent and unknown brethren.
One smallest new fact obtained in the laboratory, one brick built into
the temple of science, far outweighs any second-hand exposition which
passes an idle hour, but can leave no useful result behind it. I put
forward this obvious reflection, not out of any desire to disparage Mr.
Waldron in particular, but that you may not lose your sense of
proportion and mistake the acolyte for the high priest." (At this point
Mr. Waldron whispered to the chairman, who half rose and said something
severely to his water-carafe.) "But enough of this!" (Loud and
prolonged cheers.) "Let me pass to some subject of wider interest.
What is the particular point upon which I, as an original investigator,
have challenged our lecturer's accuracy? It is upon the permanence of
certain types of animal life upon the earth. I do not speak upon this
subject as an amateur, nor, I may add, as a popular lecturer, but I
speak as one whose scientific conscience compels him to adhere closely
to facts, when I say that Mr. Waldron is very wrong in supposing that
because he has never himself seen a so-called prehistoric animal,
therefore these creatures no longer exist. They are indeed, as he has
said, our ancestors, but they are, if I may use the expression, our
contemporary ancestors, who can still be found with all their hideous
and formidable characteristics if one has but the energy and hardihood
to seek their haunts. Creatures which were supposed to be Jurassic,
monsters who would hunt down and devour our largest and fiercest
mammals, still exist." (Cries of "Bosh!" "Prove it!" "How do YOU know?"
"Question!") "How do I know, you ask me? I know because I have visited
their secret haunts. I know because I have seen some of them."
(Applause, uproar, and a voice, "Liar!") "Am I a liar?" (General
hearty and noisy assent.) "Did I hear someone say that I was a liar?
Will the person who called me a liar kindly stand up that I may know
him?" (A voice, "Here he is, sir!" and an inoffensive little person in
spectacles, struggling violently, was held up among a group of
students.) "Did you venture to call me a liar?" ("No, sir, no!"
shouted the accused, and disappeared like a jack-in-the-box.) "If any
person in this hall dares to doubt my veracity, I shall be glad to have
a few words with him after the lecture." ("Liar!") "Who said that?"
(Again the inoffensive one plunging desperately, was elevated high into
the air.) "If I come down among you----" (General chorus of "Come,
love, come!" which interrupted the proceedings for some moments, while
the chairman, standing up and waving both his arms, seemed to be
conducting the music. The Professor, with his face flushed, his
nostrils dilated, and his beard bristling, was now in a proper Berserk
mood.) "Every great discoverer has been met with the same
incredulity--the sure brand of a generation of fools. When great facts
are laid before you, you have not the intuition, the imagination which
would help you to understand them. You can only throw mud at the men
who have risked their lives to open new fields to science. You
persecute the prophets! Galileo! Darwin, and I----" (Prolonged
cheering and complete interruption.)

All this is from my hurried notes taken at the time, which give little
notion of the absolute chaos to which the assembly had by this time
been reduced. So terrific was the uproar that several ladies had
already beaten a hurried retreat. Grave and reverend seniors seemed to
have caught the prevailing spirit as badly as the students, and I saw
white-bearded men rising and shaking their fists at the obdurate
Professor. The whole great audience seethed and simmered like a
boiling pot. The Professor took a step forward and raised both his
hands. There was something so big and arresting and virile in the man
that the clatter and shouting died gradually away before his commanding
gesture and his masterful eyes. He seemed to have a definite message.
They hushed to hear it.

"I will not detain you," he said. "It is not worth it. Truth is
truth, and the noise of a number of foolish young men--and, I fear I
must add, of their equally foolish seniors--cannot affect the matter.
I claim that I have opened a new field of science. You dispute it."
(Cheers.) "Then I put you to the test. Will you accredit one or more
of your own number to go out as your representatives and test my
statement in your name?"

Mr. Summerlee, the veteran Professor of Comparative Anatomy, rose among
the audience, a tall, thin, bitter man, with the withered aspect of a
theologian. He wished, he said, to ask Professor Challenger whether
the results to which he had alluded in his remarks had been obtained
during a journey to the headwaters of the Amazon made by him two years
before.

Professor Challenger answered that they had.

Mr. Summerlee desired to know how it was that Professor Challenger
claimed to have made discoveries in those regions which had been
overlooked by Wallace, Bates, and other previous explorers of
established scientific repute.

Professor Challenger answered that Mr. Summerlee appeared to be
confusing the Amazon with the Thames; that it was in reality a somewhat
larger river; that Mr. Summerlee might be interested to know that with
the Orinoco, which communicated with it, some fifty thousand miles of
country were opened up, and that in so vast a space it was not
impossible for one person to find what another had missed.

Mr. Summerlee declared, with an acid smile, that he fully appreciated
the difference between the Thames and the Amazon, which lay in the fact
that any assertion about the former could be tested, while about the
latter it could not. He would be obliged if Professor Challenger would
give the latitude and the longitude of the country in which prehistoric
animals were to be found.

Professor Challenger replied that he reserved such information for good
reasons of his own, but would be prepared to give it with proper
precautions to a committee chosen from the audience. Would Mr.
Summerlee serve on such a committee and test his story in person?

Mr. Summerlee: "Yes, I will." (Great cheering.)

Professor Challenger: "Then I guarantee that I will place in your
hands such material as will enable you to find your way. It is only
right, however, since Mr. Summerlee goes to check my statement that I
should have one or more with him who may check his. I will not
disguise from you that there are difficulties and dangers. Mr.
Summerlee will need a younger colleague. May I ask for volunteers?"

It is thus that the great crisis of a man's life springs out at him.
Could I have imagined when I entered that hall that I was about to
pledge myself to a wilder adventure than had ever come to me in my
dreams? But Gladys--was it not the very opportunity of which she
spoke? Gladys would have told me to go. I had sprung to my feet. I
was speaking, and yet I had prepared no words. Tarp Henry, my
companion, was plucking at my skirts and I heard him whispering, "Sit
down, Malone! Don't make a public ass of yourself." At the same time I
was aware that a tall, thin man, with dark gingery hair, a few seats in
front of me, was also upon his feet. He glared back at me with hard
angry eyes, but I refused to give way.

"I will go, Mr. Chairman," I kept repeating over and over again.

"Name! Name!" cried the audience.

"My name is Edward Dunn Malone. I am the reporter of the Daily
Gazette. I claim to be an absolutely unprejudiced witness."

"What is YOUR name, sir?" the chairman asked of my tall rival.

"I am Lord John Roxton. I have already been up the Amazon, I know all
the ground, and have special qualifications for this investigation."

"Lord John Roxton's reputation as a sportsman and a traveler is, of
course, world-famous," said the chairman; "at the same time it would
certainly be as well to have a member of the Press upon such an
expedition."

"Then I move," said Professor Challenger, "that both these gentlemen be
elected, as representatives of this meeting, to accompany Professor
Summerlee upon his journey to investigate and to report upon the truth
of my statements."

And so, amid shouting and cheering, our fate was decided, and I found
myself borne away in the human current which swirled towards the door,
with my mind half stunned by the vast new project which had risen so
suddenly before it. As I emerged from the hall I was conscious for a
moment of a rush of laughing students--down the pavement, and of an arm
wielding a heavy umbrella, which rose and fell in the midst of them.
Then, amid a mixture of groans and cheers, Professor Challenger's
electric brougham slid from the curb, and I found myself walking under
the silvery lights of Regent Street, full of thoughts of Gladys and of
wonder as to my future.

Suddenly there was a touch at my elbow. I turned, and found myself
looking into the humorous, masterful eyes of the tall, thin man who had
volunteered to be my companion on this strange quest.

"Mr. Malone, I understand," said he. "We are to be companions--what?
My rooms are just over the road, in the Albany. Perhaps you would have
the kindness to spare me half an hour, for there are one or two things
that I badly want to say to you."

CHAPTER VI

"I was the Flail of the Lord"

Lord John Roxton and I turned down Vigo Street together and through the
dingy portals of the famous aristocratic rookery. At the end of a long
drab passage my new acquaintance pushed open a door and turned on an
electric switch. A number of lamps shining through tinted shades
bathed the whole great room before us in a ruddy radiance. Standing in
the doorway and glancing round me, I had a general impression of
extraordinary comfort and elegance combined with an atmosphere of
masculine virility. Everywhere there were mingled the luxury of the
wealthy man of taste and the careless untidiness of the bachelor. Rich
furs and strange iridescent mats from some Oriental bazaar were
scattered upon the floor. Pictures and prints which even my
unpractised eyes could recognize as being of great price and rarity
hung thick upon the walls. Sketches of boxers, of ballet-girls, and of
racehorses alternated with a sensuous Fragonard, a martial Girardet,
and a dreamy Turner. But amid these varied ornaments there were
scattered the trophies which brought back strongly to my recollection
the fact that Lord John Roxton was one of the great all-round sportsmen
and athletes of his day. A dark-blue oar crossed with a cherry-pink
one above his mantel-piece spoke of the old Oxonian and Leander man,
while the foils and boxing-gloves above and below them were the tools
of a man who had won supremacy with each. Like a dado round the room
was the jutting line of splendid heavy game-heads, the best of their
sort from every quarter of the world, with the rare white rhinoceros of
the Lado Enclave drooping its supercilious lip above them all.

In the center of the rich red carpet was a black and gold Louis Quinze
table, a lovely antique, now sacrilegiously desecrated with marks of
glasses and the scars of cigar-stumps. On it stood a silver tray of
smokables and a burnished spirit-stand, from which and an adjacent
siphon my silent host proceeded to charge two high glasses. Having
indicated an arm-chair to me and placed my refreshment near it, he
handed me a long, smooth Havana. Then, seating himself opposite to me,
he looked at me long and fixedly with his strange, twinkling, reckless
eyes--eyes of a cold light blue, the color of a glacier lake.

Through the thin haze of my cigar-smoke I noted the details of a face
which was already familiar to me from many photographs--the
strongly-curved nose, the hollow, worn cheeks, the dark, ruddy hair,
thin at the top, the crisp, virile moustaches, the small, aggressive
tuft upon his projecting chin. Something there was of Napoleon III.,
something of Don Quixote, and yet again something which was the essence
of the English country gentleman, the keen, alert, open-air lover of
dogs and of horses. His skin was of a rich flower-pot red from sun and
wind. His eyebrows were tufted and overhanging, which gave those
naturally cold eyes an almost ferocious aspect, an impression which was
increased by his strong and furrowed brow. In figure he was spare, but
very strongly built--indeed, he had often proved that there were few
men in England capable of such sustained exertions. His height was a
little over six feet, but he seemed shorter on account of a peculiar
rounding of the shoulders. Such was the famous Lord John Roxton as he
sat opposite to me, biting hard upon his cigar and watching me steadily
in a long and embarrassing silence.

"Well," said he, at last, "we've gone and done it, young fellah my
lad." (This curious phrase he pronounced as if it were all one
word--"young-fellah-me-lad.") "Yes, we've taken a jump, you an' me. I
suppose, now, when you went into that room there was no such notion in
your head--what?"

"No thought of it."

"The same here. No thought of it. And here we are, up to our necks in
the tureen. Why, I've only been back three weeks from Uganda, and
taken a place in Scotland, and signed the lease and all. Pretty goin's
on--what? How does it hit you?"

"Well, it is all in the main line of my business. I am a journalist on
the Gazette."

"Of course--you said so when you took it on. By the way, I've got a
small job for you, if you'll help me."

"With pleasure."

"Don't mind takin' a risk, do you?"

"What is the risk?"

"Well, it's Ballinger--he's the risk. You've heard of him?"

"No."

"Why, young fellah, where HAVE you lived? Sir John Ballinger is the
best gentleman jock in the north country. I could hold him on the flat
at my best, but over jumps he's my master. Well, it's an open secret
that when he's out of trainin' he drinks hard--strikin' an average, he
calls it. He got delirium on Toosday, and has been ragin' like a devil
ever since. His room is above this. The doctors say that it is all up
with the old dear unless some food is got into him, but as he lies in
bed with a revolver on his coverlet, and swears he will put six of the
best through anyone that comes near him, there's been a bit of a strike
among the serving-men. He's a hard nail, is Jack, and a dead shot,
too, but you can't leave a Grand National winner to die like
that--what?"

"What do you mean to do, then?" I asked.

"Well, my idea was that you and I could rush him. He may be dozin',
and at the worst he can only wing one of us, and the other should have
him. If we can get his bolster-cover round his arms and then 'phone up
a stomach-pump, we'll give the old dear the supper of his life."

It was a rather desperate business to come suddenly into one's day's
work. I don't think that I am a particularly brave man. I have an
Irish imagination which makes the unknown and the untried more terrible
than they are. On the other hand, I was brought up with a horror of
cowardice and with a terror of such a stigma. I dare say that I could
throw myself over a precipice, like the Hun in the history books, if my
courage to do it were questioned, and yet it would surely be pride and
fear, rather than courage, which would be my inspiration. Therefore,
although every nerve in my body shrank from the whisky-maddened figure
which I pictured in the room above, I still answered, in as careless a
voice as I could command, that I was ready to go. Some further remark
of Lord Roxton's about the danger only made me irritable.

"Talking won't make it any better," said I. "Come on."

I rose from my chair and he from his. Then with a little confidential
chuckle of laughter, he patted me two or three times on the chest,
finally pushing me back into my chair.

"All right, sonny my lad--you'll do," said he. I looked up in surprise.

"I saw after Jack Ballinger myself this mornin'. He blew a hole in the
skirt of my kimono, bless his shaky old hand, but we got a jacket on
him, and he's to be all right in a week. I say, young fellah, I hope
you don't mind--what? You see, between you an' me close-tiled, I look
on this South American business as a mighty serious thing, and if I
have a pal with me I want a man I can bank on. So I sized you down,
and I'm bound to say that you came well out of it. You see, it's all
up to you and me, for this old Summerlee man will want dry-nursin' from
the first. By the way, are you by any chance the Malone who is
expected to get his Rugby cap for Ireland?"

"A reserve, perhaps."

"I thought I remembered your face. Why, I was there when you got that
try against Richmond--as fine a swervin' run as I saw the whole season.
I never miss a Rugby match if I can help it, for it is the manliest
game we have left. Well, I didn't ask you in here just to talk sport.
We've got to fix our business. Here are the sailin's, on the first
page of the Times. There's a Booth boat for Para next Wednesday week,
and if the Professor and you can work it, I think we should take
it--what? Very good, I'll fix it with him. What about your outfit?"

"My paper will see to that."

"Can you shoot?"

"About average Territorial standard."

"Good Lord! as bad as that? It's the last thing you young fellahs
think of learnin'. You're all bees without stings, so far as lookin'
after the hive goes. You'll look silly, some o' these days, when
someone comes along an' sneaks the honey. But you'll need to hold your
gun straight in South America, for, unless our friend the Professor is
a madman or a liar, we may see some queer things before we get back.
What gun have you?"

He crossed to an oaken cupboard, and as he threw it open I caught a
glimpse of glistening rows of parallel barrels, like the pipes of an
organ.

"I'll see what I can spare you out of my own battery," said he.

One by one he took out a succession of beautiful rifles, opening and
shutting them with a snap and a clang, and then patting them as he put
them back into the rack as tenderly as a mother would fondle her
children.

"This is a Bland's .577 axite express," said he. "I got that big
fellow with it." He glanced up at the white rhinoceros. "Ten more
yards, and he'd would have added me to HIS collection.

'On that conical bullet his one chance hangs,
'Tis the weak one's advantage fair.'

Hope you know your Gordon, for he's the poet of the horse and the gun
and the man that handles both. Now, here's a useful tool--.470,
telescopic sight, double ejector, point-blank up to three-fifty.
That's the rifle I used against the Peruvian slave-drivers three years
ago. I was the flail of the Lord up in those parts, I may tell you,
though you won't find it in any Blue-book. There are times, young
fellah, when every one of us must make a stand for human right and
justice, or you never feel clean again. That's why I made a little war
on my own. Declared it myself, waged it myself, ended it myself. Each
of those nicks is for a slave murderer--a good row of them--what? That
big one is for Pedro Lopez, the king of them all, that I killed in a
backwater of the Putomayo River. Now, here's something that would do
for you." He took out a beautiful brown-and-silver rifle. "Well
rubbered at the stock, sharply sighted, five cartridges to the clip.
You can trust your life to that." He handed it to me and closed the
door of his oak cabinet.

"By the way," he continued, coming back to his chair, "what do you know
of this Professor Challenger?"

"I never saw him till to-day."

"Well, neither did I. It's funny we should both sail under sealed
orders from a man we don't know. He seemed an uppish old bird. His
brothers of science don't seem too fond of him, either. How came you
to take an interest in the affair?"

I told him shortly my experiences of the morning, and he listened
intently. Then he drew out a map of South America and laid it on the
table.

"I believe every single word he said to you was the truth," said he,
earnestly, "and, mind you, I have something to go on when I speak like
that. South America is a place I love, and I think, if you take it
right through from Darien to Fuego, it's the grandest, richest, most
wonderful bit of earth upon this planet. People don't know it yet, and
don't realize what it may become. I've been up an' down it from end to
end, and had two dry seasons in those very parts, as I told you when I
spoke of the war I made on the slave-dealers. Well, when I was up
there I heard some yarns of the same kind--traditions of Indians and
the like, but with somethin' behind them, no doubt. The more you knew
of that country, young fellah, the more you would understand that
anythin' was possible--ANYTHIN'! There are just some narrow
water-lanes along which folk travel, and outside that it is all
darkness. Now, down here in the Matto Grande"--he swept his cigar over
a part of the map--"or up in this corner where three countries meet,
nothin' would surprise me. As that chap said to-night, there are
fifty-thousand miles of water-way runnin' through a forest that is very
near the size of Europe. You and I could be as far away from each
other as Scotland is from Constantinople, and yet each of us be in the
same great Brazilian forest. Man has just made a track here and a
scrape there in the maze. Why, the river rises and falls the best part
of forty feet, and half the country is a morass that you can't pass
over. Why shouldn't somethin' new and wonderful lie in such a country?
And why shouldn't we be the men to find it out? Besides," he added,
his queer, gaunt face shining with delight, "there's a sportin' risk in
every mile of it. I'm like an old golf-ball--I've had all the white
paint knocked off me long ago. Life can whack me about now, and it
can't leave a mark. But a sportin' risk, young fellah, that's the salt
of existence. Then it's worth livin' again. We're all gettin' a deal
too soft and dull and comfy. Give me the great waste lands and the
wide spaces, with a gun in my fist and somethin' to look for that's
worth findin'. I've tried war and steeplechasin' and aeroplanes, but
this huntin' of beasts that look like a lobster-supper dream is a
brand-new sensation." He chuckled with glee at the prospect.

Perhaps I have dwelt too long upon this new acquaintance, but he is to
be my comrade for many a day, and so I have tried to set him down as I
first saw him, with his quaint personality and his queer little tricks
of speech and of thought. It was only the need of getting in the
account of my meeting which drew me at last from his company. I left
him seated amid his pink radiance, oiling the lock of his favorite
rifle, while he still chuckled to himself at the thought of the
adventures which awaited us. It was very clear to me that if dangers
lay before us I could not in all England have found a cooler head or a
braver spirit with which to share them.

That night, wearied as I was after the wonderful happenings of the day,
I sat late with McArdle, the news editor, explaining to him the whole
situation, which he thought important enough to bring next morning
before the notice of Sir George Beaumont, the chief. It was agreed
that I should write home full accounts of my adventures in the shape of
successive letters to McArdle, and that these should either be edited
for the Gazette as they arrived, or held back to be published later,
according to the wishes of Professor Challenger, since we could not yet
know what conditions he might attach to those directions which should
guide us to the unknown land. In response to a telephone inquiry, we
received nothing more definite than a fulmination against the Press,
ending up with the remark that if we would notify our boat he would
hand us any directions which he might think it proper to give us at the
moment of starting. A second question from us failed to elicit any
answer at all, save a plaintive bleat from his wife to the effect that
her husband was in a very violent temper already, and that she hoped we
would do nothing to make it worse. A third attempt, later in the day,
provoked a terrific crash, and a subsequent message from the Central
Exchange that Professor Challenger's receiver had been shattered.
After that we abandoned all attempt at communication.

And now my patient readers, I can address you directly no longer. From
now onwards (if, indeed, any continuation of this narrative should ever
reach you) it can only be through the paper which I represent. In the
hands of the editor I leave this account of the events which have led
up to one of the most remarkable expeditions of all time, so that if I
never return to England there shall be some record as to how the affair
came about. I am writing these last lines in the saloon of the Booth
liner Francisca, and they will go back by the pilot to the keeping of
Mr. McArdle. Let me draw one last picture before I close the
notebook--a picture which is the last memory of the old country which I
bear away with me. It is a wet, foggy morning in the late spring; a
thin, cold rain is falling. Three shining mackintoshed figures are
walking down the quay, making for the gang-plank of the great liner
from which the blue-peter is flying. In front of them a porter pushes
a trolley piled high with trunks, wraps, and gun-cases. Professor
Summerlee, a long, melancholy figure, walks with dragging steps and
drooping head, as one who is already profoundly sorry for himself.
Lord John Roxton steps briskly, and his thin, eager face beams forth
between his hunting-cap and his muffler. As for myself, I am glad to
have got the bustling days of preparation and the pangs of leave-taking
behind me, and I have no doubt that I show it in my bearing. Suddenly,
just as we reach the vessel, there is a shout behind us. It is
Professor Challenger, who had promised to see us off. He runs after
us, a puffing, red-faced, irascible figure.

"No thank you," says he; "I should much prefer not to go aboard. I
have only a few words to say to you, and they can very well be said
where we are. I beg you not to imagine that I am in any way indebted
to you for making this journey. I would have you to understand that it
is a matter of perfect indifference to me, and I refuse to entertain
the most remote sense of personal obligation. Truth is truth, and
nothing which you can report can affect it in any way, though it may
excite the emotions and allay the curiosity of a number of very
ineffectual people. My directions for your instruction and guidance
are in this sealed envelope. You will open it when you reach a town
upon the Amazon which is called Manaos, but not until the date and hour
which is marked upon the outside. Have I made myself clear? I leave
the strict observance of my conditions entirely to your honor. No, Mr.
Malone, I will place no restriction upon your correspondence, since the
ventilation of the facts is the object of your journey; but I demand
that you shall give no particulars as to your exact destination, and
that nothing be actually published until your return. Good-bye, sir.
You have done something to mitigate my feelings for the loathsome
profession to which you unhappily belong. Good-bye, Lord John.
Science is, as I understand, a sealed book to you; but you may
congratulate yourself upon the hunting-field which awaits you. You
will, no doubt, have the opportunity of describing in the Field how you
brought down the rocketing dimorphodon. And good-bye to you also,
Professor Summerlee. If you are still capable of self-improvement, of
which I am frankly unconvinced, you will surely return to London a
wiser man."

So he turned upon his heel, and a minute later from the deck I could
see his short, squat figure bobbing about in the distance as he made
his way back to his train. Well, we are well down Channel now.
There's the last bell for letters, and it's good-bye to the pilot.
We'll be "down, hull-down, on the old trail" from now on. God bless
all we leave behind us, and send us safely back.

CHAPTER VII

"To-morrow we Disappear into the Unknown"

I will not bore those whom this narrative may reach by an account of
our luxurious voyage upon the Booth liner, nor will I tell of our
week's stay at Para (save that I should wish to acknowledge the great
kindness of the Pereira da Pinta Company in helping us to get together
our equipment). I will also allude very briefly to our river journey,
up a wide, slow-moving, clay-tinted stream, in a steamer which was
little smaller than that which had carried us across the Atlantic.
Eventually we found ourselves through the narrows of Obidos and reached
the town of Manaos. Here we were rescued from the limited attractions
of the local inn by Mr. Shortman, the representative of the British and
Brazilian Trading Company. In his hospitable Fazenda we spent our time
until the day when we were empowered to open the letter of instructions
given to us by Professor Challenger. Before I reach the surprising
events of that date I would desire to give a clearer sketch of my
comrades in this enterprise, and of the associates whom we had already
gathered together in South America. I speak freely, and I leave the
use of my material to your own discretion, Mr. McArdle, since it is
through your hands that this report must pass before it reaches the
world.

The scientific attainments of Professor Summerlee are too well known
for me to trouble to recapitulate them. He is better equipped for a
rough expedition of this sort than one would imagine at first sight.
His tall, gaunt, stringy figure is insensible to fatigue, and his dry,
half-sarcastic, and often wholly unsympathetic manner is uninfluenced
by any change in his surroundings. Though in his sixty-sixth year, I
have never heard him express any dissatisfaction at the occasional
hardships which we have had to encounter. I had regarded his presence
as an encumbrance to the expedition, but, as a matter of fact, I am now
well convinced that his power of endurance is as great as my own. In
temper he is naturally acid and sceptical. From the beginning he has
never concealed his belief that Professor Challenger is an absolute
fraud, that we are all embarked upon an absurd wild-goose chase and
that we are likely to reap nothing but disappointment and danger in
South America, and corresponding ridicule in England. Such are the
views which, with much passionate distortion of his thin features and
wagging of his thin, goat-like beard, he poured into our ears all the
way from Southampton to Manaos. Since landing from the boat he has
obtained some consolation from the beauty and variety of the insect and
bird life around him, for he is absolutely whole-hearted in his
devotion to science. He spends his days flitting through the woods
with his shot-gun and his butterfly-net, and his evenings in mounting
the many specimens he has acquired. Among his minor peculiarities are
that he is careless as to his attire, unclean in his person,
exceedingly absent-minded in his habits, and addicted to smoking a
short briar pipe, which is seldom out of his mouth. He has been upon
several scientific expeditions in his youth (he was with Robertson in
Papua), and the life of the camp and the canoe is nothing fresh to him.

Lord John Roxton has some points in common with Professor Summerlee,
and others in which they are the very antithesis to each other. He is
twenty years younger, but has something of the same spare, scraggy
physique. As to his appearance, I have, as I recollect, described it
in that portion of my narrative which I have left behind me in London.
He is exceedingly neat and prim in his ways, dresses always with great
care in white drill suits and high brown mosquito-boots, and shaves at
least once a day. Like most men of action, he is laconic in speech,
and sinks readily into his own thoughts, but he is always quick to
answer a question or join in a conversation, talking in a queer, jerky,
half-humorous fashion. His knowledge of the world, and very especially
of South America, is surprising, and he has a whole-hearted belief in
the possibilities of our journey which is not to be dashed by the
sneers of Professor Summerlee. He has a gentle voice and a quiet
manner, but behind his twinkling blue eyes there lurks a capacity for
furious wrath and implacable resolution, the more dangerous because
they are held in leash. He spoke little of his own exploits in Brazil
and Peru, but it was a revelation to me to find the excitement which
was caused by his presence among the riverine natives, who looked upon
him as their champion and protector. The exploits of the Red Chief, as
they called him, had become legends among them, but the real facts, as
far as I could learn them, were amazing enough.

These were that Lord John had found himself some years before in that
no-man's-land which is formed by the half-defined frontiers between
Peru, Brazil, and Columbia. In this great district the wild rubber
tree flourishes, and has become, as in the Congo, a curse to the
natives which can only be compared to their forced labor under the
Spaniards upon the old silver mines of Darien. A handful of villainous
half-breeds dominated the country, armed such Indians as would support
them, and turned the rest into slaves, terrorizing them with the most
inhuman tortures in order to force them to gather the india-rubber,
which was then floated down the river to Para. Lord John Roxton
expostulated on behalf of the wretched victims, and received nothing
but threats and insults for his pains. He then formally declared war
against Pedro Lopez, the leader of the slave-drivers, enrolled a band
of runaway slaves in his service, armed them, and conducted a campaign,
which ended by his killing with his own hands the notorious half-breed
and breaking down the system which he represented.

No wonder that the ginger-headed man with the silky voice and the free
and easy manners was now looked upon with deep interest upon the banks
of the great South American river, though the feelings he inspired were
naturally mixed, since the gratitude of the natives was equaled by the
resentment of those who desired to exploit them. One useful result of
his former experiences was that he could talk fluently in the Lingoa
Geral, which is the peculiar talk, one-third Portuguese and two-thirds
Indian, which is current all over Brazil.

I have said before that Lord John Roxton was a South Americomaniac. He
could not speak of that great country without ardor, and this ardor was
infectious, for, ignorant as I was, he fixed my attention and
stimulated my curiosity. How I wish I could reproduce the glamour of
his discourses, the peculiar mixture of accurate knowledge and of racy
imagination which gave them their fascination, until even the
Professor's cynical and sceptical smile would gradually vanish from his
thin face as he listened. He would tell the history of the mighty
river so rapidly explored (for some of the first conquerors of Peru
actually crossed the entire continent upon its waters), and yet so
unknown in regard to all that lay behind its ever-changing banks.

"What is there?" he would cry, pointing to the north. "Wood and marsh
and unpenetrated jungle. Who knows what it may shelter? And there to
the south? A wilderness of swampy forest, where no white man has ever
been. The unknown is up against us on every side. Outside the narrow
lines of the rivers what does anyone know? Who will say what is
possible in such a country? Why should old man Challenger not be
right?" At which direct defiance the stubborn sneer would reappear
upon Professor Summerlee's face, and he would sit, shaking his sardonic
head in unsympathetic silence, behind the cloud of his briar-root pipe.

So much, for the moment, for my two white companions, whose characters
and limitations will be further exposed, as surely as my own, as this
narrative proceeds. But already we have enrolled certain retainers who
may play no small part in what is to come. The first is a gigantic
negro named Zambo, who is a black Hercules, as willing as any horse,
and about as intelligent. Him we enlisted at Para, on the
recommendation of the steamship company, on whose vessels he had
learned to speak a halting English.

It was at Para also that we engaged Gomez and Manuel, two half-breeds
from up the river, just come down with a cargo of redwood. They were
swarthy fellows, bearded and fierce, as active and wiry as panthers.
Both of them had spent their lives in those upper waters of the Amazon
which we were about to explore, and it was this recommendation which
had caused Lord John to engage them. One of them, Gomez, had the
further advantage that he could speak excellent English. These men
were willing to act as our personal servants, to cook, to row, or to
make themselves useful in any way at a payment of fifteen dollars a
month. Besides these, we had engaged three Mojo Indians from Bolivia,
who are the most skilful at fishing and boat work of all the river
tribes. The chief of these we called Mojo, after his tribe, and the
others are known as Jose and Fernando. Three white men, then, two
half-breeds, one negro, and three Indians made up the personnel of the
little expedition which lay waiting for its instructions at Manaos
before starting upon its singular quest.

At last, after a weary week, the day had come and the hour. I ask you
to picture the shaded sitting-room of the Fazenda St. Ignatio, two
miles inland from the town of Manaos. Outside lay the yellow, brassy
glare of the sunshine, with the shadows of the palm trees as black and
definite as the trees themselves. The air was calm, full of the
eternal hum of insects, a tropical chorus of many octaves, from the
deep drone of the bee to the high, keen pipe of the mosquito. Beyond
the veranda was a small cleared garden, bounded with cactus hedges and
adorned with clumps of flowering shrubs, round which the great blue
butterflies and the tiny humming-birds fluttered and darted in
crescents of sparkling light. Within we were seated round the cane
table, on which lay a sealed envelope. Inscribed upon it, in the
jagged handwriting of Professor Challenger, were the words:--

"Instructions to Lord John Roxton and party. To be opened at Manaos
upon July 15th, at 12 o'clock precisely."

Lord John had placed his watch upon the table beside him.

"We have seven more minutes," said he. "The old dear is very precise."

Professor Summerlee gave an acid smile as he picked up the envelope in
his gaunt hand.

"What can it possibly matter whether we open it now or in seven
minutes?" said he. "It is all part and parcel of the same system of
quackery and nonsense, for which I regret to say that the writer is
notorious."

"Oh, come, we must play the game accordin' to rules," said Lord John.
"It's old man Challenger's show and we are here by his good will, so it
would be rotten bad form if we didn't follow his instructions to the
letter."

"A pretty business it is!" cried the Professor, bitterly. "It struck
me as preposterous in London, but I'm bound to say that it seems even
more so upon closer acquaintance. I don't know what is inside this
envelope, but, unless it is something pretty definite, I shall be much
tempted to take the next down-river boat and catch the Bolivia at Para.
After all, I have some more responsible work in the world than to run
about disproving the assertions of a lunatic. Now, Roxton, surely it
is time."

"Time it is," said Lord John. "You can blow the whistle." He took up
the envelope and cut it with his penknife. From it he drew a folded
sheet of paper. This he carefully opened out and flattened on the
table. It was a blank sheet. He turned it over. Again it was blank.
We looked at each other in a bewildered silence, which was broken by a
discordant burst of derisive laughter from Professor Summerlee.

"It is an open admission," he cried. "What more do you want? The
fellow is a self-confessed humbug. We have only to return home and
report him as the brazen imposter that he is."

"Invisible ink!" I suggested.

"I don't think!" said Lord Roxton, holding the paper to the light.
"No, young fellah my lad, there is no use deceiving yourself. I'll go
bail for it that nothing has ever been written upon this paper."

"May I come in?" boomed a voice from the veranda.

The shadow of a squat figure had stolen across the patch of sunlight.
That voice! That monstrous breadth of shoulder! We sprang to our feet
with a gasp of astonishment as Challenger, in a round, boyish straw-hat
with a colored ribbon--Challenger, with his hands in his jacket-pockets
and his canvas shoes daintily pointing as he walked--appeared in the
open space before us. He threw back his head, and there he stood in
the golden glow with all his old Assyrian luxuriance of beard, all his
native insolence of drooping eyelids and intolerant eyes.

"I fear," said he, taking out his watch, "that I am a few minutes too
late. When I gave you this envelope I must confess that I had never
intended that you should open it, for it had been my fixed intention to
be with you before the hour. The unfortunate delay can be apportioned
between a blundering pilot and an intrusive sandbank. I fear that it
has given my colleague, Professor Summerlee, occasion to blaspheme."

"I am bound to say, sir," said Lord John, with some sternness of voice,
"that your turning up is a considerable relief to us, for our mission
seemed to have come to a premature end. Even now I can't for the life
of me understand why you should have worked it in so extraordinary a
manner."

Instead of answering, Professor Challenger entered, shook hands with
myself and Lord John, bowed with ponderous insolence to Professor
Summerlee, and sank back into a basket-chair, which creaked and swayed
beneath his weight.

"Is all ready for your journey?" he asked.

"We can start to-morrow."

"Then so you shall. You need no chart of directions now, since you
will have the inestimable advantage of my own guidance. From the first
I had determined that I would myself preside over your investigation.
The most elaborate charts would, as you will readily admit, be a poor
substitute for my own intelligence and advice. As to the small ruse
which I played upon you in the matter of the envelope, it is clear
that, had I told you all my intentions, I should have been forced to
resist unwelcome pressure to travel out with you."

"Not from me, sir!" exclaimed Professor Summerlee, heartily. "So long
as there was another ship upon the Atlantic."

Challenger waved him away with his great hairy hand.

"Your common sense will, I am sure, sustain my objection and realize
that it was better that I should direct my own movements and appear
only at the exact moment when my presence was needed. That moment has
now arrived. You are in safe hands. You will not now fail to reach
your destination. From henceforth I take command of this expedition,
and I must ask you to complete your preparations to-night, so that we
may be able to make an early start in the morning. My time is of
value, and the same thing may be said, no doubt, in a lesser degree of
your own. I propose, therefore, that we push on as rapidly as
possible, until I have demonstrated what you have come to see."

Lord John Roxton has chartered a large steam launch, the Esmeralda,
which was to carry us up the river. So far as climate goes, it was
immaterial what time we chose for our expedition, as the temperature
ranges from seventy-five to ninety degrees both summer and winter, with
no appreciable difference in heat. In moisture, however, it is
otherwise; from December to May is the period of the rains, and during
this time the river slowly rises until it attains a height of nearly
forty feet above its low-water mark. It floods the banks, extends in
great lagoons over a monstrous waste of country, and forms a huge
district, called locally the Gapo, which is for the most part too
marshy for foot-travel and too shallow for boating. About June the
waters begin to fall, and are at their lowest at October or November.
Thus our expedition was at the time of the dry season, when the great
river and its tributaries were more or less in a normal condition.

The current of the river is a slight one, the drop being not greater
than eight inches in a mile. No stream could be more convenient for
navigation, since the prevailing wind is south-east, and sailing boats
may make a continuous progress to the Peruvian frontier, dropping down
again with the current. In our own case the excellent engines of the
Esmeralda could disregard the sluggish flow of the stream, and we made
as rapid progress as if we were navigating a stagnant lake. For three
days we steamed north-westwards up a stream which even here, a thousand
miles from its mouth, was still so enormous that from its center the
two banks were mere shadows upon the distant skyline. On the fourth
day after leaving Manaos we turned into a tributary which at its mouth
was little smaller than the main stream. It narrowed rapidly, however,
and after two more days' steaming we reached an Indian village, where
the Professor insisted that we should land, and that the Esmeralda
should be sent back to Manaos. We should soon come upon rapids, he
explained, which would make its further use impossible. He added
privately that we were now approaching the door of the unknown country,
and that the fewer whom we took into our confidence the better it would
be. To this end also he made each of us give our word of honor that we
would publish or say nothing which would give any exact clue as to the
whereabouts of our travels, while the servants were all solemnly sworn
to the same effect. It is for this reason that I am compelled to be
vague in my narrative, and I would warn my readers that in any map or
diagram which I may give the relation of places to each other may be
correct, but the points of the compass are carefully confused, so that
in no way can it be taken as an actual guide to the country. Professor
Challenger's reasons for secrecy may be valid or not, but we had no
choice but to adopt them, for he was prepared to abandon the whole
expedition rather than modify the conditions upon which he would guide
us.

It was August 2nd when we snapped our last link with the outer world by
bidding farewell to the Esmeralda. Since then four days have passed,
during which we have engaged two large canoes from the Indians, made of
so light a material (skins over a bamboo framework) that we should be
able to carry them round any obstacle. These we have loaded with all
our effects, and have engaged two additional Indians to help us in the
navigation. I understand that they are the very two--Ataca and Ipetu
by name--who accompanied Professor Challenger upon his previous
journey. They appeared to be terrified at the prospect of repeating
it, but the chief has patriarchal powers in these countries, and if the
bargain is good in his eyes the clansman has little choice in the
matter.

So to-morrow we disappear into the unknown. This account I am
transmitting down the river by canoe, and it may be our last word to
those who are interested in our fate. I have, according to our
arrangement, addressed it to you, my dear Mr. McArdle, and I leave it
to your discretion to delete, alter, or do what you like with it. From
the assurance of Professor Challenger's manner--and in spite of the
continued scepticism of Professor Summerlee--I have no doubt that our
leader will make good his statement, and that we are really on the eve
of some most remarkable experiences.

CHAPTER VIII

"The Outlying Pickets of the New World"

Our friends at home may well rejoice with us, for we are at our goal,
and up to a point, at least, we have shown that the statement of
Professor Challenger can be verified. We have not, it is true,
ascended the plateau, but it lies before us, and even Professor
Summerlee is in a more chastened mood. Not that he will for an instant
admit that his rival could be right, but he is less persistent in his
incessant objections, and has sunk for the most part into an observant
silence. I must hark back, however, and continue my narrative from
where I dropped it. We are sending home one of our local Indians who
is injured, and I am committing this letter to his charge, with
considerable doubts in my mind as to whether it will ever come to hand.

When I wrote last we were about to leave the Indian village where we
had been deposited by the Esmeralda. I have to begin my report by bad
news, for the first serious personal trouble (I pass over the incessant
bickerings between the Professors) occurred this evening, and might
have had a tragic ending. I have spoken of our English-speaking
half-breed, Gomez--a fine worker and a willing fellow, but afflicted, I
fancy, with the vice of curiosity, which is common enough among such
men. On the last evening he seems to have hid himself near the hut in
which we were discussing our plans, and, being observed by our huge
negro Zambo, who is as faithful as a dog and has the hatred which all
his race bear to the half-breeds, he was dragged out and carried into
our presence. Gomez whipped out his knife, however, and but for the
huge strength of his captor, which enabled him to disarm him with one
hand, he would certainly have stabbed him. The matter has ended in
reprimands, the opponents have been compelled to shake hands, and there
is every hope that all will be well. As to the feuds of the two
learned men, they are continuous and bitter. It must be admitted that
Challenger is provocative in the last degree, but Summerlee has an acid
tongue, which makes matters worse. Last night Challenger said that he
never cared to walk on the Thames Embankment and look up the river, as
it was always sad to see one's own eventual goal. He is convinced, of
course, that he is destined for Westminster Abbey. Summerlee rejoined,
however, with a sour smile, by saying that he understood that Millbank
Prison had been pulled down. Challenger's conceit is too colossal to
allow him to be really annoyed. He only smiled in his beard and
repeated "Really! Really!" in the pitying tone one would use to a
child. Indeed, they are children both--the one wizened and
cantankerous, the other formidable and overbearing, yet each with a
brain which has put him in the front rank of his scientific age.
Brain, character, soul--only as one sees more of life does one
understand how distinct is each.

The very next day we did actually make our start upon this remarkable
expedition. We found that all our possessions fitted very easily into
the two canoes, and we divided our personnel, six in each, taking the
obvious precaution in the interests of peace of putting one Professor
into each canoe. Personally, I was with Challenger, who was in a
beatific humor, moving about as one in a silent ecstasy and beaming
benevolence from every feature. I have had some experience of him in
other moods, however, and shall be the less surprised when the
thunderstorms suddenly come up amidst the sunshine. If it is
impossible to be at your ease, it is equally impossible to be dull in
his company, for one is always in a state of half-tremulous doubt as to
what sudden turn his formidable temper may take.

For two days we made our way up a good-sized river some hundreds of
yards broad, and dark in color, but transparent, so that one could
usually see the bottom. The affluents of the Amazon are, half of them,
of this nature, while the other half are whitish and opaque, the
difference depending upon the class of country through which they have
flowed. The dark indicate vegetable decay, while the others point to
clayey soil. Twice we came across rapids, and in each case made a
portage of half a mile or so to avoid them. The woods on either side
were primeval, which are more easily penetrated than woods of the
second growth, and we had no great difficulty in carrying our canoes
through them. How shall I ever forget the solemn mystery of it? The
height of the trees and the thickness of the boles exceeded anything
which I in my town-bred life could have imagined, shooting upwards in
magnificent columns until, at an enormous distance above our heads, we
could dimly discern the spot where they threw out their side-branches
into Gothic upward curves which coalesced to form one great matted roof
of verdure, through which only an occasional golden ray of sunshine
shot downwards to trace a thin dazzling line of light amidst the
majestic obscurity. As we walked noiselessly amid the thick, soft
carpet of decaying vegetation the hush fell upon our souls which comes
upon us in the twilight of the Abbey, and even Professor Challenger's
full-chested notes sank into a whisper. Alone, I should have been
ignorant of the names of these giant growths, but our men of science
pointed out the cedars, the great silk cotton trees, and the redwood
trees, with all that profusion of various plants which has made this
continent the chief supplier to the human race of those gifts of Nature
which depend upon the vegetable world, while it is the most backward in
those products which come from animal life. Vivid orchids and
wonderful colored lichens smoldered upon the swarthy tree-trunks and
where a wandering shaft of light fell full upon the golden allamanda,
the scarlet star-clusters of the tacsonia, or the rich deep blue of
ipomaea, the effect was as a dream of fairyland. In these great wastes
of forest, life, which abhors darkness, struggles ever upwards to the
light. Every plant, even the smaller ones, curls and writhes to the
green surface, twining itself round its stronger and taller brethren in
the effort. Climbing plants are monstrous and luxuriant, but others
which have never been known to climb elsewhere learn the art as an
escape from that somber shadow, so that the common nettle, the jasmine,
and even the jacitara palm tree can be seen circling the stems of the
cedars and striving to reach their crowns. Of animal life there was no
movement amid the majestic vaulted aisles which stretched from us as we
walked, but a constant movement far above our heads told of that
multitudinous world of snake and monkey, bird and sloth, which lived in
the sunshine, and looked down in wonder at our tiny, dark, stumbling
figures in the obscure depths immeasurably below them. At dawn and at
sunset the howler monkeys screamed together and the parrakeets broke
into shrill chatter, but during the hot hours of the day only the full
drone of insects, like the beat of a distant surf, filled the ear,
while nothing moved amid the solemn vistas of stupendous trunks, fading
away into the darkness which held us in. Once some bandy-legged,
lurching creature, an ant-eater or a bear, scuttled clumsily amid the
shadows. It was the only sign of earth life which I saw in this great
Amazonian forest.

And yet there were indications that even human life itself was not far
from us in those mysterious recesses. On the third day out we were
aware of a singular deep throbbing in the air, rhythmic and solemn,
coming and going fitfully throughout the morning. The two boats were
paddling within a few yards of each other when first we heard it, and
our Indians remained motionless, as if they had been turned to bronze,
listening intently with expressions of terror upon their faces.

"What is it, then?" I asked.

"Drums," said Lord John, carelessly; "war drums. I have heard them
before."

"Yes, sir, war drums," said Gomez, the half-breed. "Wild Indians,
bravos, not mansos; they watch us every mile of the way; kill us if
they can."

"How can they watch us?" I asked, gazing into the dark, motionless void.

The half-breed shrugged his broad shoulders.

"The Indians know. They have their own way. They watch us. They talk
the drum talk to each other. Kill us if they can."

By the afternoon of that day--my pocket diary shows me that it was
Tuesday, August 18th--at least six or seven drums were throbbing from
various points. Sometimes they beat quickly, sometimes slowly,
sometimes in obvious question and answer, one far to the east breaking
out in a high staccato rattle, and being followed after a pause by a
deep roll from the north. There was something indescribably
nerve-shaking and menacing in that constant mutter, which seemed to
shape itself into the very syllables of the half-breed, endlessly
repeated, "We will kill you if we can. We will kill you if we can."
No one ever moved in the silent woods. All the peace and soothing of
quiet Nature lay in that dark curtain of vegetation, but away from
behind there came ever the one message from our fellow-man. "We will
kill you if we can," said the men in the east. "We will kill you if we
can," said the men in the north.

All day the drums rumbled and whispered, while their menace reflected
itself in the faces of our colored companions. Even the hardy,
swaggering half-breed seemed cowed. I learned, however, that day once
for all that both Summerlee and Challenger possessed that highest type
of bravery, the bravery of the scientific mind. Theirs was the spirit
which upheld Darwin among the gauchos of the Argentine or Wallace among
the head-hunters of Malaya. It is decreed by a merciful Nature that
the human brain cannot think of two things simultaneously, so that if
it be steeped in curiosity as to science it has no room for merely
personal considerations. All day amid that incessant and mysterious
menace our two Professors watched every bird upon the wing, and every
shrub upon the bank, with many a sharp wordy contention, when the snarl
of Summerlee came quick upon the deep growl of Challenger, but with no
more sense of danger and no more reference to drum-beating Indians than
if they were seated together in the smoking-room of the Royal Society's
Club in St. James's Street. Once only did they condescend to discuss
them.

"Miranha or Amajuaca cannibals," said Challenger, jerking his thumb
towards the reverberating wood.

"No doubt, sir," Summerlee answered. "Like all such tribes, I shall
expect to find them of poly-synthetic speech and of Mongolian type."

"Polysynthetic certainly," said Challenger, indulgently. "I am not
aware that any other type of language exists in this continent, and I
have notes of more than a hundred. The Mongolian theory I regard with
deep suspicion."

"I should have thought that even a limited knowledge of comparative
anatomy would have helped to verify it," said Summerlee, bitterly.

Challenger thrust out his aggressive chin until he was all beard and
hat-rim. "No doubt, sir, a limited knowledge would have that effect.
When one's knowledge is exhaustive, one comes to other conclusions."
They glared at each other in mutual defiance, while all round rose the
distant whisper, "We will kill you--we will kill you if we can."

That night we moored our canoes with heavy stones for anchors in the
center of the stream, and made every preparation for a possible attack.
Nothing came, however, and with the dawn we pushed upon our way, the
drum-beating dying out behind us. About three o'clock in the afternoon
we came to a very steep rapid, more than a mile long--the very one in
which Professor Challenger had suffered disaster upon his first
journey. I confess that the sight of it consoled me, for it was really
the first direct corroboration, slight as it was, of the truth of his
story. The Indians carried first our canoes and then our stores
through the brushwood, which is very thick at this point, while we four
whites, our rifles on our shoulders, walked between them and any danger
coming from the woods. Before evening we had successfully passed the
rapids, and made our way some ten miles above them, where we anchored
for the night. At this point I reckoned that we had come not less than
a hundred miles up the tributary from the main stream.

It was in the early forenoon of the next day that we made the great
departure. Since dawn Professor Challenger had been acutely uneasy,
continually scanning each bank of the river. Suddenly he gave an
exclamation of satisfaction and pointed to a single tree, which
projected at a peculiar angle over the side of the stream.

"What do you make of that?" he asked.

"It is surely an Assai palm," said Summerlee.

"Exactly. It was an Assai palm which I took for my landmark. The
secret opening is half a mile onwards upon the other side of the river.
There is no break in the trees. That is the wonder and the mystery of
it. There where you see light-green rushes instead of dark-green
undergrowth, there between the great cotton woods, that is my private
gate into the unknown. Push through, and you will understand."

It was indeed a wonderful place. Having reached the spot marked by a
line of light-green rushes, we poled out two canoes through them for
some hundreds of yards, and eventually emerged into a placid and
shallow stream, running clear and transparent over a sandy bottom. It
may have been twenty yards across, and was banked in on each side by
most luxuriant vegetation. No one who had not observed that for a
short distance reeds had taken the place of shrubs, could possibly have
guessed the existence of such a stream or dreamed of the fairyland
beyond.

For a fairyland it was--the most wonderful that the imagination of man
could conceive. The thick vegetation met overhead, interlacing into a
natural pergola, and through this tunnel of verdure in a golden
twilight flowed the green, pellucid river, beautiful in itself, but
marvelous from the strange tints thrown by the vivid light from above
filtered and tempered in its fall. Clear as crystal, motionless as a
sheet of glass, green as the edge of an iceberg, it stretched in front
of us under its leafy archway, every stroke of our paddles sending a
thousand ripples across its shining surface. It was a fitting avenue
to a land of wonders. All sign of the Indians had passed away, but
animal life was more frequent, and the tameness of the creatures showed
that they knew nothing of the hunter. Fuzzy little black-velvet
monkeys, with snow-white teeth and gleaming, mocking eyes, chattered at
us as we passed. With a dull, heavy splash an occasional cayman
plunged in from the bank. Once a dark, clumsy tapir stared at us from
a gap in the bushes, and then lumbered away through the forest; once,
too, the yellow, sinuous form of a great puma whisked amid the
brushwood, and its green, baleful eyes glared hatred at us over its
tawny shoulder. Bird life was abundant, especially the wading birds,
stork, heron, and ibis gathering in little groups, blue, scarlet, and
white, upon every log which jutted from the bank, while beneath us the
crystal water was alive with fish of every shape and color.

For three days we made our way up this tunnel of hazy green sunshine.
On the longer stretches one could hardly tell as one looked ahead where
the distant green water ended and the distant green archway began. The
deep peace of this strange waterway was unbroken by any sign of man.

"No Indian here. Too much afraid. Curupuri," said Gomez.

"Curupuri is the spirit of the woods," Lord John explained. "It's a
name for any kind of devil. The poor beggars think that there is
something fearsome in this direction, and therefore they avoid it."

On the third day it became evident that our journey in the canoes could
not last much longer, for the stream was rapidly growing more shallow.
Twice in as many hours we stuck upon the bottom. Finally we pulled the
boats up among the brushwood and spent the night on the bank of the
river. In the morning Lord John and I made our way for a couple of
miles through the forest, keeping parallel with the stream; but as it
grew ever shallower we returned and reported, what Professor Challenger
had already suspected, that we had reached the highest point to which
the canoes could be brought. We drew them up, therefore, and concealed
them among the bushes, blazing a tree with our axes, so that we should
find them again. Then we distributed the various burdens among
us--guns, ammunition, food, a tent, blankets, and the rest--and,
shouldering our packages, we set forth upon the more laborious stage of
our journey.

An unfortunate quarrel between our pepper-pots marked the outset of our
new stage. Challenger had from the moment of joining us issued
directions to the whole party, much to the evident discontent of
Summerlee. Now, upon his assigning some duty to his fellow-Professor
(it was only the carrying of an aneroid barometer), the matter suddenly
came to a head.

"May I ask, sir," said Summerlee, with vicious calm, "in what capacity
you take it upon yourself to issue these orders?"

Challenger glared and bristled.

"I do it, Professor Summerlee, as leader of this expedition."

"I am compelled to tell you, sir, that I do not recognize you in that
capacity."

"Indeed!" Challenger bowed with unwieldy sarcasm. "Perhaps you would
define my exact position."

"Yes, sir. You are a man whose veracity is upon trial, and this
committee is here to try it. You walk, sir, with your judges."

"Dear me!" said Challenger, seating himself on the side of one of the
canoes. "In that case you will, of course, go on your way, and I will
follow at my leisure. If I am not the leader you cannot expect me to
lead."

Thank heaven that there were two sane men--Lord John Roxton and
myself--to prevent the petulance and folly of our learned Professors
from sending us back empty-handed to London. Such arguing and pleading
and explaining before we could get them mollified! Then at last
Summerlee, with his sneer and his pipe, would move forwards, and
Challenger would come rolling and grumbling after. By some good
fortune we discovered about this time that both our savants had the
very poorest opinion of Dr. Illingworth of Edinburgh. Thenceforward
that was our one safety, and every strained situation was relieved by
our introducing the name of the Scotch zoologist, when both our
Professors would form a temporary alliance and friendship in their
detestation and abuse of this common rival.

Advancing in single file along the bank of the stream, we soon found
that it narrowed down to a mere brook, and finally that it lost itself
in a great green morass of sponge-like mosses, into which we sank up to
our knees. The place was horribly haunted by clouds of mosquitoes and
every form of flying pest, so we were glad to find solid ground again
and to make a circuit among the trees, which enabled us to outflank
this pestilent morass, which droned like an organ in the distance, so
loud was it with insect life.

On the second day after leaving our canoes we found that the whole
character of the country changed. Our road was persistently upwards,
and as we ascended the woods became thinner and lost their tropical
luxuriance. The huge trees of the alluvial Amazonian plain gave place
to the Phoenix and coco palms, growing in scattered clumps, with thick
brushwood between. In the damper hollows the Mauritia palms threw out
their graceful drooping fronds. We traveled entirely by compass, and
once or twice there were differences of opinion between Challenger and
the two Indians, when, to quote the Professor's indignant words, the
whole party agreed to "trust the fallacious instincts of undeveloped
savages rather than the highest product of modern European culture."
That we were justified in doing so was shown upon the third day, when
Challenger admitted that he recognized several landmarks of his former
journey, and in one spot we actually came upon four fire-blackened
stones, which must have marked a camping-place.

The road still ascended, and we crossed a rock-studded slope which took
two days to traverse. The vegetation had again changed, and only the
vegetable ivory tree remained, with a great profusion of wonderful
orchids, among which I learned to recognize the rare Nuttonia
Vexillaria and the glorious pink and scarlet blossoms of Cattleya and
odontoglossum. Occasional brooks with pebbly bottoms and fern-draped
banks gurgled down the shallow gorges in the hill, and offered good
camping-grounds every evening on the banks of some rock-studded pool,
where swarms of little blue-backed fish, about the size and shape of
English trout, gave us a delicious supper.

On the ninth day after leaving the canoes, having done, as I reckon,
about a hundred and twenty miles, we began to emerge from the trees,
which had grown smaller until they were mere shrubs. Their place was
taken by an immense wilderness of bamboo, which grew so thickly that we
could only penetrate it by cutting a pathway with the machetes and
billhooks of the Indians. It took us a long day, traveling from seven
in the morning till eight at night, with only two breaks of one hour
each, to get through this obstacle. Anything more monotonous and
wearying could not be imagined, for, even at the most open places, I
could not see more than ten or twelve yards, while usually my vision
was limited to the back of Lord John's cotton jacket in front of me,
and to the yellow wall within a foot of me on either side. From above
came one thin knife-edge of sunshine, and fifteen feet over our heads
one saw the tops of the reeds swaying against the deep blue sky. I do
not know what kind of creatures inhabit such a thicket, but several
times we heard the plunging of large, heavy animals quite close to us.
From their sounds Lord John judged them to be some form of wild cattle.
Just as night fell we cleared the belt of bamboos, and at once formed
our camp, exhausted by the interminable day.

Early next morning we were again afoot, and found that the character of
the country had changed once again. Behind us was the wall of bamboo,
as definite as if it marked the course of a river. In front was an
open plain, sloping slightly upwards and dotted with clumps of
tree-ferns, the whole curving before us until it ended in a long,
whale-backed ridge. This we reached about midday, only to find a
shallow valley beyond, rising once again into a gentle incline which
led to a low, rounded sky-line. It was here, while we crossed the
first of these hills, that an incident occurred which may or may not
have been important.

Professor Challenger, who with the two local Indians was in the van of
the party, stopped suddenly and pointed excitedly to the right. As he
did so we saw, at the distance of a mile or so, something which
appeared to be a huge gray bird flap slowly up from the ground and skim
smoothly off, flying very low and straight, until it was lost among the
tree-ferns.

"Did you see it?" cried Challenger, in exultation. "Summerlee, did you
see it?"

His colleague was staring at the spot where the creature had
disappeared.

"What do you claim that it was?" he asked.

"To the best of my belief, a pterodactyl."

Summerlee burst into derisive laughter "A pter-fiddlestick!" said he.
"It was a stork, if ever I saw one."

Challenger was too furious to speak. He simply swung his pack upon his
back and continued upon his march. Lord John came abreast of me,
however, and his face was more grave than was his wont. He had his
Zeiss glasses in his hand.

"I focused it before it got over the trees," said he. "I won't
undertake to say what it was, but I'll risk my reputation as a
sportsman that it wasn't any bird that ever I clapped eyes on in my
life."

So there the matter stands. Are we really just at the edge of the
unknown, encountering the outlying pickets of this lost world of which
our leader speaks? I give you the incident as it occurred and you will
know as much as I do. It stands alone, for we saw nothing more which
could be called remarkable.

And now, my readers, if ever I have any, I have brought you up the
broad river, and through the screen of rushes, and down the green
tunnel, and up the long slope of palm trees, and through the bamboo
brake, and across the plain of tree-ferns. At last our destination lay
in full sight of us. When we had crossed the second ridge we saw
before us an irregular, palm-studded plain, and then the line of high
red cliffs which I have seen in the picture. There it lies, even as I
write, and there can be no question that it is the same. At the
nearest point it is about seven miles from our present camp, and it
curves away, stretching as far as I can see. Challenger struts about
like a prize peacock, and Summerlee is silent, but still sceptical.
Another day should bring some of our doubts to an end. Meanwhile, as
Jose, whose arm was pierced by a broken bamboo, insists upon returning,
I send this letter back in his charge, and only hope that it may
eventually come to hand. I will write again as the occasion serves. I
have enclosed with this a rough chart of our journey, which may have
the effect of making the account rather easier to understand.

CHAPTER IX

"Who could have Foreseen it?"

A dreadful thing has happened to us. Who could have foreseen it? I
cannot foresee any end to our troubles. It may be that we are
condemned to spend our whole lives in this strange, inaccessible place.
I am still so confused that I can hardly think clearly of the facts of
the present or of the chances of the future. To my astounded senses
the one seems most terrible and the other as black as night.

No men have ever found themselves in a worse position; nor is there any
use in disclosing to you our exact geographical situation and asking
our friends for a relief party. Even if they could send one, our fate
will in all human probability be decided long before it could arrive in
South America.

We are, in truth, as far from any human aid as if we were in the moon.
If we are to win through, it is only our own qualities which can save
us. I have as companions three remarkable men, men of great
brain-power and of unshaken courage. There lies our one and only hope.
It is only when I look upon the untroubled faces of my comrades that I
see some glimmer through the darkness. Outwardly I trust that I appear
as unconcerned as they. Inwardly I am filled with apprehension.

Let me give you, with as much detail as I can, the sequence of events
which have led us to this catastrophe.

When I finished my last letter I stated that we were within seven miles
from an enormous line of ruddy cliffs, which encircled, beyond all
doubt, the plateau of which Professor Challenger spoke. Their height,
as we approached them, seemed to me in some places to be greater than
he had stated--running up in parts to at least a thousand feet--and
they were curiously striated, in a manner which is, I believe,
characteristic of basaltic upheavals. Something of the sort is to be
seen in Salisbury Crags at Edinburgh. The summit showed every sign of
a luxuriant vegetation, with bushes near the edge, and farther back
many high trees. There was no indication of any life that we could see.

That night we pitched our camp immediately under the cliff--a most wild
and desolate spot. The crags above us were not merely perpendicular,
but curved outwards at the top, so that ascent was out of the question.
Close to us was the high thin pinnacle of rock which I believe I
mentioned earlier in this narrative. It is like a broad red church
spire, the top of it being level with the plateau, but a great chasm
gaping between. On the summit of it there grew one high tree. Both
pinnacle and cliff were comparatively low--some five or six hundred
feet, I should think.

"It was on that," said Professor Challenger, pointing to this tree,
"that the pterodactyl was perched. I climbed half-way up the rock
before I shot him. I am inclined to think that a good mountaineer like
myself could ascend the rock to the top, though he would, of course, be
no nearer to the plateau when he had done so."

As Challenger spoke of his pterodactyl I glanced at Professor
Summerlee, and for the first time I seemed to see some signs of a
dawning credulity and repentance. There was no sneer upon his thin
lips, but, on the contrary, a gray, drawn look of excitement and
amazement. Challenger saw it, too, and reveled in the first taste of
victory.

"Of course," said he, with his clumsy and ponderous sarcasm,
"Professor Summerlee will understand that when I speak of a pterodactyl
I mean a stork--only it is the kind of stork which has no feathers, a
leathery skin, membranous wings, and teeth in its jaws." He grinned
and blinked and bowed until his colleague turned and walked away.

In the morning, after a frugal breakfast of coffee and manioc--we had
to be economical of our stores--we held a council of war as to the best
method of ascending to the plateau above us.

Challenger presided with a solemnity as if he were the Lord Chief
Justice on the Bench. Picture him seated upon a rock, his absurd
boyish straw hat tilted on the back of his head, his supercilious eyes
dominating us from under his drooping lids, his great black beard
wagging as he slowly defined our present situation and our future
movements.

Beneath him you might have seen the three of us--myself, sunburnt,
young, and vigorous after our open-air tramp; Summerlee, solemn but
still critical, behind his eternal pipe; Lord John, as keen as a
razor-edge, with his supple, alert figure leaning upon his rifle, and
his eager eyes fixed eagerly upon the speaker. Behind us were grouped
the two swarthy half-breeds and the little knot of Indians, while in
front and above us towered those huge, ruddy ribs of rocks which kept
us from our goal.

"I need not say," said our leader, "that on the occasion of my last
visit I exhausted every means of climbing the cliff, and where I failed
I do not think that anyone else is likely to succeed, for I am
something of a mountaineer. I had none of the appliances of a
rock-climber with me, but I have taken the precaution to bring them
now. With their aid I am positive I could climb that detached pinnacle
to the summit; but so long as the main cliff overhangs, it is vain to
attempt ascending that. I was hurried upon my last visit by the
approach of the rainy season and by the exhaustion of my supplies.
These considerations limited my time, and I can only claim that I have
surveyed about six miles of the cliff to the east of us, finding no
possible way up. What, then, shall we now do?"

"There seems to be only one reasonable course," said Professor
Summerlee. "If you have explored the east, we should travel along the
base of the cliff to the west, and seek for a practicable point for our
ascent."

"That's it," said Lord John. "The odds are that this plateau is of no
great size, and we shall travel round it until we either find an easy
way up it, or come back to the point from which we started."

"I have already explained to our young friend here," said Challenger
(he has a way of alluding to me as if I were a school child ten years
old), "that it is quite impossible that there should be an easy way up
anywhere, for the simple reason that if there were the summit would not
be isolated, and those conditions would not obtain which have effected
so singular an interference with the general laws of survival. Yet I
admit that there may very well be places where an expert human climber
may reach the summit, and yet a cumbrous and heavy animal be unable to
descend. It is certain that there is a point where an ascent is
possible."

"How do you know that, sir?" asked Summerlee, sharply.

"Because my predecessor, the American Maple White, actually made such
an ascent. How otherwise could he have seen the monster which he
sketched in his notebook?"

"There you reason somewhat ahead of the proved facts," said the
stubborn Summerlee. "I admit your plateau, because I have seen it; but
I have not as yet satisfied myself that it contains any form of life
whatever."

"What you admit, sir, or what you do not admit, is really of
inconceivably small importance. I am glad to perceive that the plateau
itself has actually obtruded itself upon your intelligence." He glanced
up at it, and then, to our amazement, he sprang from his rock, and,
seizing Summerlee by the neck, he tilted his face into the air. "Now
sir!" he shouted, hoarse with excitement. "Do I help you to realize
that the plateau contains some animal life?"

I have said that a thick fringe of green overhung the edge of the
cliff. Out of this there had emerged a black, glistening object. As
it came slowly forth and overhung the chasm, we saw that it was a very
large snake with a peculiar flat, spade-like head. It wavered and
quivered above us for a minute, the morning sun gleaming upon its
sleek, sinuous coils. Then it slowly drew inwards and disappeared.

Summerlee had been so interested that he had stood unresisting while
Challenger tilted his head into the air. Now he shook his colleague
off and came back to his dignity.

"I should be glad, Professor Challenger," said he, "if you could see
your way to make any remarks which may occur to you without seizing me
by the chin. Even the appearance of a very ordinary rock python does
not appear to justify such a liberty."

"But there is life upon the plateau all the same," his colleague
replied in triumph. "And now, having demonstrated this important
conclusion so that it is clear to anyone, however prejudiced or obtuse,
I am of opinion that we cannot do better than break up our camp and
travel to westward until we find some means of ascent."

The ground at the foot of the cliff was rocky and broken so that the
going was slow and difficult. Suddenly we came, however, upon
something which cheered our hearts. It was the site of an old
encampment, with several empty Chicago meat tins, a bottle labeled
"Brandy," a broken tin-opener, and a quantity of other travelers'
debris. A crumpled, disintegrated newspaper revealed itself as the
Chicago Democrat, though the date had been obliterated.

"Not mine," said Challenger. "It must be Maple White's."

Lord John had been gazing curiously at a great tree-fern which
overshadowed the encampment. "I say, look at this," said he. "I
believe it is meant for a sign-post."

A slip of hard wood had been nailed to the tree in such a way as to
point to the westward.

"Most certainly a sign-post," said Challenger. "What else? Finding
himself upon a dangerous errand, our pioneer has left this sign so that
any party which follows him may know the way he has taken. Perhaps we
shall come upon some other indications as we proceed."

We did indeed, but they were of a terrible and most unexpected nature.
Immediately beneath the cliff there grew a considerable patch of high
bamboo, like that which we had traversed in our journey. Many of these
stems were twenty feet high, with sharp, strong tops, so that even as
they stood they made formidable spears. We were passing along the edge
of this cover when my eye was caught by the gleam of something white
within it. Thrusting in my head between the stems, I found myself
gazing at a fleshless skull. The whole skeleton was there, but the
skull had detached itself and lay some feet nearer to the open.

With a few blows from the machetes of our Indians we cleared the spot
and were able to study the details of this old tragedy. Only a few
shreds of clothes could still be distinguished, but there were the
remains of boots upon the bony feet, and it was very clear that the
dead man was a European. A gold watch by Hudson, of New York, and a
chain which held a stylographic pen, lay among the bones. There was
also a silver cigarette-case, with "J. C., from A. E. S.," upon the
lid. The state of the metal seemed to show that the catastrophe had
occurred no great time before.

"Who can he be?" asked Lord John. "Poor devil! every bone in his body
seems to be broken."

"And the bamboo grows through his smashed ribs," said Summerlee. "It
is a fast-growing plant, but it is surely inconceivable that this body
could have been here while the canes grew to be twenty feet in length."

"As to the man's identity," said Professor Challenger, "I have no doubt
whatever upon that point. As I made my way up the river before I
reached you at the fazenda I instituted very particular inquiries about
Maple White. At Para they knew nothing. Fortunately, I had a definite
clew, for there was a particular picture in his sketch-book which
showed him taking lunch with a certain ecclesiastic at Rosario. This
priest I was able to find, and though he proved a very argumentative
fellow, who took it absurdly amiss that I should point out to him the
corrosive effect which modern science must have upon his beliefs, he
none the less gave me some positive information. Maple White passed
Rosario four years ago, or two years before I saw his dead body. He
was not alone at the time, but there was a friend, an American named
James Colver, who remained in the boat and did not meet this
ecclesiastic. I think, therefore, that there can be no doubt that we
are now looking upon the remains of this James Colver."

"Nor," said Lord John, "is there much doubt as to how he met his death.
He has fallen or been chucked from the top, and so been impaled. How
else could he come by his broken bones, and how could he have been
stuck through by these canes with their points so high above our heads?"

A hush came over us as we stood round these shattered remains and
realized the truth of Lord John Roxton's words. The beetling head of
the cliff projected over the cane-brake. Undoubtedly he had fallen
from above. But had he fallen? Had it been an accident? Or--already
ominous and terrible possibilities began to form round that unknown
land.

We moved off in silence, and continued to coast round the line of
cliffs, which were as even and unbroken as some of those monstrous
Antarctic ice-fields which I have seen depicted as stretching from
horizon to horizon and towering high above the mast-heads of the
exploring vessel.

In five miles we saw no rift or break. And then suddenly we perceived
something which filled us with new hope. In a hollow of the rock,
protected from rain, there was drawn a rough arrow in chalk, pointing
still to the westwards.

"Maple White again," said Professor Challenger. "He had some
presentiment that worthy footsteps would follow close behind him."

"He had chalk, then?"

"A box of colored chalks was among the effects I found in his knapsack.
I remember that the white one was worn to a stump."

"That is certainly good evidence," said Summerlee. "We can only accept
his guidance and follow on to the westward."

We had proceeded some five more miles when again we saw a white arrow
upon the rocks. It was at a point where the face of the cliff was for
the first time split into a narrow cleft. Inside the cleft was a
second guidance mark, which pointed right up it with the tip somewhat
elevated, as if the spot indicated were above the level of the ground.

It was a solemn place, for the walls were so gigantic and the slit of
blue sky so narrow and so obscured by a double fringe of verdure, that
only a dim and shadowy light penetrated to the bottom. We had had no
food for many hours, and were very weary with the stony and irregular
journey, but our nerves were too strung to allow us to halt. We
ordered the camp to be pitched, however, and, leaving the Indians to
arrange it, we four, with the two half-breeds, proceeded up the narrow
gorge.

It was not more than forty feet across at the mouth, but it rapidly
closed until it ended in an acute angle, too straight and smooth for an
ascent. Certainly it was not this which our pioneer had attempted to
indicate. We made our way back--the whole gorge was not more than a
quarter of a mile deep--and then suddenly the quick eyes of Lord John
fell upon what we were seeking. High up above our heads, amid the dark
shadows, there was one circle of deeper gloom. Surely it could only be
the opening of a cave.

The base of the cliff was heaped with loose stones at the spot, and it
was not difficult to clamber up. When we reached it, all doubt was
removed. Not only was it an opening into the rock, but on the side of
it there was marked once again the sign of the arrow. Here was the
point, and this the means by which Maple White and his ill-fated
comrade had made their ascent.

We were too excited to return to the camp, but must make our first
exploration at once. Lord John had an electric torch in his knapsack,
and this had to serve us as light. He advanced, throwing his little
clear circlet of yellow radiance before him, while in single file we
followed at his heels.

The cave had evidently been water-worn, the sides being smooth and the
floor covered with rounded stones. It was of such a size that a single
man could just fit through by stooping. For fifty yards it ran almost
straight into the rock, and then it ascended at an angle of forty-five.
Presently this incline became even steeper, and we found ourselves
climbing upon hands and knees among loose rubble which slid from
beneath us. Suddenly an exclamation broke from Lord Roxton.

"It's blocked!" said he.

Clustering behind him we saw in the yellow field of light a wall of
broken basalt which extended to the ceiling.

"The roof has fallen in!"

In vain we dragged out some of the pieces. The only effect was that
the larger ones became detached and threatened to roll down the
gradient and crush us. It was evident that the obstacle was far beyond
any efforts which we could make to remove it. The road by which Maple
White had ascended was no longer available.

Too much cast down to speak, we stumbled down the dark tunnel and made
our way back to the camp.

One incident occurred, however, before we left the gorge, which is of
importance in view of what came afterwards.

We had gathered in a little group at the bottom of the chasm, some
forty feet beneath the mouth of the cave, when a huge rock rolled
suddenly downwards--and shot past us with tremendous force. It was the
narrowest escape for one or all of us. We could not ourselves see
whence the rock had come, but our half-breed servants, who were still
at the opening of the cave, said that it had flown past them, and must
therefore have fallen from the summit. Looking upwards, we could see
no sign of movement above us amidst the green jungle which topped the
cliff. There could be little doubt, however, that the stone was aimed
at us, so the incident surely pointed to humanity--and malevolent
humanity--upon the plateau.

We withdrew hurriedly from the chasm, our minds full of this new
development and its bearing upon our plans. The situation was
difficult enough before, but if the obstructions of Nature were
increased by the deliberate opposition of man, then our case was indeed
a hopeless one. And yet, as we looked up at that beautiful fringe of
verdure only a few hundreds of feet above our heads, there was not one
of us who could conceive the idea of returning to London until we had
explored it to its depths.

On discussing the situation, we determined that our best course was to
continue to coast round the plateau in the hope of finding some other
means of reaching the top. The line of cliffs, which had decreased
considerably in height, had already begun to trend from west to north,
and if we could take this as representing the arc of a circle, the
whole circumference could not be very great. At the worst, then, we
should be back in a few days at our starting-point.

We made a march that day which totaled some two-and-twenty miles,
without any change in our prospects. I may mention that our aneroid
shows us that in the continual incline which we have ascended since we
abandoned our canoes we have risen to no less than three thousand feet
above sea-level. Hence there is a considerable change both in the
temperature and in the vegetation. We have shaken off some of that
horrible insect life which is the bane of tropical travel. A few palms
still survive, and many tree-ferns, but the Amazonian trees have been
all left behind. It was pleasant to see the convolvulus, the
passion-flower, and the begonia, all reminding me of home, here among
these inhospitable rocks. There was a red begonia just the same color
as one that is kept in a pot in the window of a certain villa in
Streatham--but I am drifting into private reminiscence.

That night--I am still speaking of the first day of our
circumnavigation of the plateau--a great experience awaited us, and one
which for ever set at rest any doubt which we could have had as to the
wonders so near us.

You will realize as you read it, my dear Mr. McArdle, and possibly for
the first time that the paper has not sent me on a wild-goose chase,
and that there is inconceivably fine copy waiting for the world
whenever we have the Professor's leave to make use of it. I shall not
dare to publish these articles unless I can bring back my proofs to
England, or I shall be hailed as the journalistic Munchausen of all
time. I have no doubt that you feel the same way yourself, and that
you would not care to stake the whole credit of the Gazette upon this
adventure until we can meet the chorus of criticism and scepticism
which such articles must of necessity elicit. So this wonderful
incident, which would make such a headline for the old paper, must
still wait its turn in the editorial drawer.

And yet it was all over in a flash, and there was no sequel to it, save
in our own convictions.

What occurred was this. Lord John had shot an ajouti--which is a
small, pig-like animal--and, half of it having been given to the
Indians, we were cooking the other half upon our fire. There is a
chill in the air after dark, and we had all drawn close to the blaze.
The night was moonless, but there were some stars, and one could see
for a little distance across the plain. Well, suddenly out of the
darkness, out of the night, there swooped something with a swish like
an aeroplane. The whole group of us were covered for an instant by a
canopy of leathery wings, and I had a momentary vision of a long,
snake-like neck, a fierce, red, greedy eye, and a great snapping beak,
filled, to my amazement, with little, gleaming teeth. The next instant
it was gone--and so was our dinner. A huge black shadow, twenty feet
across, skimmed up into the air; for an instant the monster wings
blotted out the stars, and then it vanished over the brow of the cliff
above us. We all sat in amazed silence round the fire, like the heroes
of Virgil when the Harpies came down upon them. It was Summerlee who
was the first to speak.

"Professor Challenger," said he, in a solemn voice, which quavered with
emotion, "I owe you an apology. Sir, I am very much in the wrong, and
I beg that you will forget what is past."

It was handsomely said, and the two men for the first time shook hands.
So much we have gained by this clear vision of our first pterodactyl.
It was worth a stolen supper to bring two such men together.

But if prehistoric life existed upon the plateau it was not
superabundant, for we had no further glimpse of it during the next
three days. During this time we traversed a barren and forbidding
country, which alternated between stony desert and desolate marshes
full of many wild-fowl, upon the north and east of the cliffs. From
that direction the place is really inaccessible, and, were it not for a
hardish ledge which runs at the very base of the precipice, we should
have had to turn back. Many times we were up to our waists in the
slime and blubber of an old, semi-tropical swamp. To make matters
worse, the place seemed to be a favorite breeding-place of the Jaracaca
snake, the most venomous and aggressive in South America. Again and
again these horrible creatures came writhing and springing towards us
across the surface of this putrid bog, and it was only by keeping our
shot-guns for ever ready that we could feel safe from them. One
funnel-shaped depression in the morass, of a livid green in color from
some lichen which festered in it, will always remain as a nightmare
memory in my mind. It seems to have been a special nest of these
vermins, and the slopes were alive with them, all writhing in our
direction, for it is a peculiarity of the Jaracaca that he will always
attack man at first sight. There were too many for us to shoot, so we
fairly took to our heels and ran until we were exhausted. I shall
always remember as we looked back how far behind we could see the heads
and necks of our horrible pursuers rising and falling amid the reeds.
Jaracaca Swamp we named it in the map which we are constructing.

The cliffs upon the farther side had lost their ruddy tint, being
chocolate-brown in color; the vegetation was more scattered along the
top of them, and they had sunk to three or four hundred feet in height,
but in no place did we find any point where they could be ascended. If
anything, they were more impossible than at the first point where we
had met them. Their absolute steepness is indicated in the photograph
which I took over the stony desert.

"Surely," said I, as we discussed the situation, "the rain must find
its way down somehow. There are bound to be water-channels in the
rocks."

"Our young friend has glimpses of lucidity," said Professor Challenger,
patting me upon the shoulder.

"The rain must go somewhere," I repeated.

"He keeps a firm grip upon actuality. The only drawback is that we
have conclusively proved by ocular demonstration that there are no
water channels down the rocks."

"Where, then, does it go?" I persisted.

"I think it may be fairly assumed that if it does not come outwards it
must run inwards."

"Then there is a lake in the center."

"So I should suppose."

"It is more than likely that the lake may be an old crater," said
Summerlee. "The whole formation is, of course, highly volcanic. But,
however that may be, I should expect to find the surface of the plateau
slope inwards with a considerable sheet of water in the center, which
may drain off, by some subterranean channel, into the marshes of the
Jaracaca Swamp."

"Or evaporation might preserve an equilibrium," remarked Challenger,
and the two learned men wandered off into one of their usual scientific
arguments, which were as comprehensible as Chinese to the layman.

On the sixth day we completed our first circuit of the cliffs, and
found ourselves back at the first camp, beside the isolated pinnacle of
rock. We were a disconsolate party, for nothing could have been more
minute than our investigation, and it was absolutely certain that there
was no single point where the most active human being could possibly
hope to scale the cliff. The place which Maple White's chalk-marks had
indicated as his own means of access was now entirely impassable.

What were we to do now? Our stores of provisions, supplemented by our
guns, were holding out well, but the day must come when they would need
replenishment. In a couple of months the rains might be expected, and
we should be washed out of our camp. The rock was harder than marble,
and any attempt at cutting a path for so great a height was more than
our time or resources would admit. No wonder that we looked gloomily
at each other that night, and sought our blankets with hardly a word
exchanged. I remember that as I dropped off to sleep my last
recollection was that Challenger was squatting, like a monstrous
bull-frog, by the fire, his huge head in his hands, sunk apparently in
the deepest thought, and entirely oblivious to the good-night which I
wished him.

But it was a very different Challenger who greeted us in the morning--a
Challenger with contentment and self-congratulation shining from his
whole person. He faced us as we assembled for breakfast with a
deprecating false modesty in his eyes, as who should say, "I know that
I deserve all that you can say, but I pray you to spare my blushes by
not saying it." His beard bristled exultantly, his chest was thrown
out, and his hand was thrust into the front of his jacket. So, in his
fancy, may he see himself sometimes, gracing the vacant pedestal in
Trafalgar Square, and adding one more to the horrors of the London
streets.

"Eureka!" he cried, his teeth shining through his beard. "Gentlemen,
you may congratulate me and we may congratulate each other. The
problem is solved."

"You have found a way up?"

"I venture to think so."

"And where?"

For answer he pointed to the spire-like pinnacle upon our right.

Our faces--or mine, at least--fell as we surveyed it. That it could be
climbed we had our companion's assurance. But a horrible abyss lay
between it and the plateau.

"We can never get across," I gasped.

"We can at least all reach the summit," said he. "When we are up I may
be able to show you that the resources of an inventive mind are not yet
exhausted."

After breakfast we unpacked the bundle in which our leader had brought
his climbing accessories. From it he took a coil of the strongest and
lightest rope, a hundred and fifty feet in length, with climbing irons,
clamps, and other devices. Lord John was an experienced mountaineer,
and Summerlee had done some rough climbing at various times, so that I
was really the novice at rock-work of the party; but my strength and
activity may have made up for my want of experience.

It was not in reality a very stiff task, though there were moments
which made my hair bristle upon my head. The first half was perfectly
easy, but from there upwards it became continually steeper until, for
the last fifty feet, we were literally clinging with our fingers and
toes to tiny ledges and crevices in the rock. I could not have
accomplished it, nor could Summerlee, if Challenger had not gained the
summit (it was extraordinary to see such activity in so unwieldy a
creature) and there fixed the rope round the trunk of the considerable
tree which grew there. With this as our support, we were soon able to
scramble up the jagged wall until we found ourselves upon the small
grassy platform, some twenty-five feet each way, which formed the
summit.

The first impression which I received when I had recovered my breath
was of the extraordinary view over the country which we had traversed.
The whole Brazilian plain seemed to lie beneath us, extending away and
away until it ended in dim blue mists upon the farthest sky-line. In
the foreground was the long slope, strewn with rocks and dotted with
tree-ferns; farther off in the middle distance, looking over the
saddle-back hill, I could just see the yellow and green mass of bamboos
through which we had passed; and then, gradually, the vegetation
increased until it formed the huge forest which extended as far as the
eyes could reach, and for a good two thousand miles beyond.

I was still drinking in this wonderful panorama when the heavy hand of
the Professor fell upon my shoulder.

"This way, my young friend," said he; "vestigia nulla retrorsum. Never
look rearwards, but always to our glorious goal."

The level of the plateau, when I turned, was exactly that on which we
stood, and the green bank of bushes, with occasional trees, was so near
that it was difficult to realize how inaccessible it remained. At a
rough guess the gulf was forty feet across, but, so far as I could see,
it might as well have been forty miles. I placed one arm round the
trunk of the tree and leaned over the abyss. Far down were the small
dark figures of our servants, looking up at us. The wall was
absolutely precipitous, as was that which faced me.

"This is indeed curious," said the creaking voice of Professor
Summerlee.

I turned, and found that he was examining with great interest the tree
to which I clung. That smooth bark and those small, ribbed leaves
seemed familiar to my eyes. "Why," I cried, "it's a beech!"

"Exactly," said Summerlee. "A fellow-countryman in a far land."

"Not only a fellow-countryman, my good sir," said Challenger, "but
also, if I may be allowed to enlarge your simile, an ally of the first
value. This beech tree will be our saviour."

"By George!" cried Lord John, "a bridge!"

"Exactly, my friends, a bridge! It is not for nothing that I expended
an hour last night in focusing my mind upon the situation. I have some
recollection of once remarking to our young friend here that G. E. C.
is at his best when his back is to the wall. Last night you will admit
that all our backs were to the wall. But where will-power and
intellect go together, there is always a way out. A drawbridge had to
be found which could be dropped across the abyss. Behold it!"

It was certainly a brilliant idea. The tree was a good sixty feet in
height, and if it only fell the right way it would easily cross the
chasm. Challenger had slung the camp axe over his shoulder when he
ascended. Now he handed it to me.

"Our young friend has the thews and sinews," said he. "I think he will
be the most useful at this task. I must beg, however, that you will
kindly refrain from thinking for yourself, and that you will do exactly
what you are told."

Under his direction I cut such gashes in the sides of the trees as
would ensure that it should fall as we desired. It had already a
strong, natural tilt in the direction of the plateau, so that the
matter was not difficult. Finally I set to work in earnest upon the
trunk, taking turn and turn with Lord John. In a little over an hour
there was a loud crack, the tree swayed forward, and then crashed over,
burying its branches among the bushes on the farther side. The severed
trunk rolled to the very edge of our platform, and for one terrible
second we all thought it was over. It balanced itself, however, a few
inches from the edge, and there was our bridge to the unknown.

All of us, without a word, shook hands with Professor Challenger, who
raised his straw hat and bowed deeply to each in turn.

"I claim the honor," said he, "to be the first to cross to the unknown
land--a fitting subject, no doubt, for some future historical painting."

He had approached the bridge when Lord John laid his hand upon his coat.

"My dear chap," said he, "I really cannot allow it."

"Cannot allow it, sir!" The head went back and the beard forward.

"When it is a matter of science, don't you know, I follow your lead
because you are by way of bein' a man of science. But it's up to you
to follow me when you come into my department."

"Your department, sir?"

"We all have our professions, and soldierin' is mine. We are,
accordin' to my ideas, invadin' a new country, which may or may not be
chock-full of enemies of sorts. To barge blindly into it for want of a
little common sense and patience isn't my notion of management."

The remonstrance was too reasonable to be disregarded. Challenger
tossed his head and shrugged his heavy shoulders.

"Well, sir, what do you propose?"

"For all I know there may be a tribe of cannibals waitin' for
lunch-time among those very bushes," said Lord John, looking across the
bridge. "It's better to learn wisdom before you get into a
cookin'-pot; so we will content ourselves with hopin' that there is no
trouble waitin' for us, and at the same time we will act as if there
were. Malone and I will go down again, therefore, and we will fetch up
the four rifles, together with Gomez and the other. One man can then
go across and the rest will cover him with guns, until he sees that it
is safe for the whole crowd to come along."

Challenger sat down upon the cut stump and groaned his impatience; but
Summerlee and I were of one mind that Lord John was our leader when
such practical details were in question. The climb was a more simple
thing now that the rope dangled down the face of the worst part of the
ascent. Within an hour we had brought up the rifles and a shot-gun.
The half-breeds had ascended also, and under Lord John's orders they
had carried up a bale of provisions in case our first exploration
should be a long one. We had each bandoliers of cartridges.

"Now, Challenger, if you really insist upon being the first man in,"
said Lord John, when every preparation was complete.

"I am much indebted to you for your gracious permission," said the
angry Professor; for never was a man so intolerant of every form of
authority. "Since you are good enough to allow it, I shall most
certainly take it upon myself to act as pioneer upon this occasion."

Seating himself with a leg overhanging the abyss on each side, and his
hatchet slung upon his back, Challenger hopped his way across the trunk
and was soon at the other side. He clambered up and waved his arms in
the air.

"At last!" he cried; "at last!"

I gazed anxiously at him, with a vague expectation that some terrible
fate would dart at him from the curtain of green behind him. But all
was quiet, save that a strange, many-colored bird flew up from under
his feet and vanished among the trees.

Summerlee was the second. His wiry energy is wonderful in so frail a
frame. He insisted upon having two rifles slung upon his back, so that
both Professors were armed when he had made his transit. I came next,
and tried hard not to look down into the horrible gulf over which I was
passing. Summerlee held out the butt-end of his rifle, and an instant
later I was able to grasp his hand. As to Lord John, he walked
across--actually walked without support! He must have nerves of iron.

And there we were, the four of us, upon the dreamland, the lost world,
of Maple White. To all of us it seemed the moment of our supreme
triumph. Who could have guessed that it was the prelude to our supreme
disaster? Let me say in a few words how the crushing blow fell upon us.

We had turned away from the edge, and had penetrated about fifty yards
of close brushwood, when there came a frightful rending crash from
behind us. With one impulse we rushed back the way that we had come.
The bridge was gone!

Far down at the base of the cliff I saw, as I looked over, a tangled
mass of branches and splintered trunk. It was our beech tree. Had the
edge of the platform crumbled and let it through? For a moment this
explanation was in all our minds. The next, from the farther side of
the rocky pinnacle before us a swarthy face, the face of Gomez the
half-breed, was slowly protruded. Yes, it was Gomez, but no longer the
Gomez of the demure smile and the mask-like expression. Here was a
face with flashing eyes and distorted features, a face convulsed with
hatred and with the mad joy of gratified revenge.

"Lord Roxton!" he shouted. "Lord John Roxton!"

"Well," said our companion, "here I am."

A shriek of laughter came across the abyss.

"Yes, there you are, you English dog, and there you will remain! I
have waited and waited, and now has come my chance. You found it hard
to get up; you will find it harder to get down. You cursed fools, you
are trapped, every one of you!"

We were too astounded to speak. We could only stand there staring in
amazement. A great broken bough upon the grass showed whence he had
gained his leverage to tilt over our bridge. The face had vanished,
but presently it was up again, more frantic than before.

"We nearly killed you with a stone at the cave," he cried; "but this is
better. It is slower and more terrible. Your bones will whiten up
there, and none will know where you lie or come to cover them. As you
lie dying, think of Lopez, whom you shot five years ago on the Putomayo
River. I am his brother, and, come what will I will die happy now, for
his memory has been avenged." A furious hand was shaken at us, and then
all was quiet.

Had the half-breed simply wrought his vengeance and then escaped, all
might have been well with him. It was that foolish, irresistible Latin
impulse to be dramatic which brought his own downfall. Roxton, the man
who had earned himself the name of the Flail of the Lord through three
countries, was not one who could be safely taunted. The half-breed was
descending on the farther side of the pinnacle; but before he could
reach the ground Lord John had run along the edge of the plateau and
gained a point from which he could see his man. There was a single
crack of his rifle, and, though we saw nothing, we heard the scream and
then the distant thud of the falling body. Roxton came back to us with
a face of granite.

"I have been a blind simpleton," said he, bitterly, "It's my folly
that has brought you all into this trouble. I should have remembered
that these people have long memories for blood-feuds, and have been
more upon my guard."

"What about the other one? It took two of them to lever that tree over
the edge."

"I could have shot him, but I let him go. He may have had no part in
it. Perhaps it would have been better if I had killed him, for he
must, as you say, have lent a hand."

Now that we had the clue to his action, each of us could cast back and
remember some sinister act upon the part of the half-breed--his
constant desire to know our plans, his arrest outside our tent when he
was over-hearing them, the furtive looks of hatred which from time to
time one or other of us had surprised. We were still discussing it,
endeavoring to adjust our minds to these new conditions, when a
singular scene in the plain below arrested our attention.

A man in white clothes, who could only be the surviving half-breed, was
running as one does run when Death is the pacemaker. Behind him, only
a few yards in his rear, bounded the huge ebony figure of Zambo, our
devoted negro. Even as we looked, he sprang upon the back of the
fugitive and flung his arms round his neck. They rolled on the ground
together. An instant afterwards Zambo rose, looked at the prostrate
man, and then, waving his hand joyously to us, came running in our
direction. The white figure lay motionless in the middle of the great
plain.

Our two traitors had been destroyed, but the mischief that they had
done lived after them. By no possible means could we get back to the
pinnacle. We had been natives of the world; now we were natives of the
plateau. The two things were separate and apart. There was the plain
which led to the canoes. Yonder, beyond the violet, hazy horizon, was
the stream which led back to civilization. But the link between was
missing. No human ingenuity could suggest a means of bridging the
chasm which yawned between ourselves and our past lives. One instant
had altered the whole conditions of our existence.

It was at such a moment that I learned the stuff of which my three
comrades were composed. They were grave, it is true, and thoughtful,
but of an invincible serenity. For the moment we could only sit among
the bushes in patience and wait the coming of Zambo. Presently his
honest black face topped the rocks and his Herculean figure emerged
upon the top of the pinnacle.

"What I do now?" he cried. "You tell me and I do it."

It was a question which it was easier to ask than to answer. One thing
only was clear. He was our one trusty link with the outside world. On
no account must he leave us.

"No no!" he cried. "I not leave you. Whatever come, you always find
me here. But no able to keep Indians. Already they say too much
Curupuri live on this place, and they go home. Now you leave them me
no able to keep them."

It was a fact that our Indians had shown in many ways of late that they
were weary of their journey and anxious to return. We realized that
Zambo spoke the truth, and that it would be impossible for him to keep
them.

"Make them wait till to-morrow, Zambo," I shouted; "then I can send
letter back by them."

"Very good, sarr! I promise they wait till to-morrow," said the negro.
"But what I do for you now?"

There was plenty for him to do, and admirably the faithful fellow did
it. First of all, under our directions, he undid the rope from the
tree-stump and threw one end of it across to us. It was not thicker
than a clothes-line, but it was of great strength, and though we could
not make a bridge of it, we might well find it invaluable if we had any
climbing to do. He then fastened his end of the rope to the package of
supplies which had been carried up, and we were able to drag it across.
This gave us the means of life for at least a week, even if we found
nothing else. Finally he descended and carried up two other packets of
mixed goods--a box of ammunition and a number of other things, all of
which we got across by throwing our rope to him and hauling it back.
It was evening when he at last climbed down, with a final assurance
that he would keep the Indians till next morning.

And so it is that I have spent nearly the whole of this our first night
upon the plateau writing up our experiences by the light of a single
candle-lantern.

We supped and camped at the very edge of the cliff, quenching our
thirst with two bottles of Apollinaris which were in one of the cases.
It is vital to us to find water, but I think even Lord John himself had
had adventures enough for one day, and none of us felt inclined to make
the first push into the unknown. We forbore to light a fire or to make
any unnecessary sound.

To-morrow (or to-day, rather, for it is already dawn as I write) we
shall make our first venture into this strange land. When I shall be
able to write again--or if I ever shall write again--I know not.
Meanwhile, I can see that the Indians are still in their place, and I
am sure that the faithful Zambo will be here presently to get my
letter. I only trust that it will come to hand.

P.S.--The more I think the more desperate does our position seem. I
see no possible hope of our return. If there were a high tree near the
edge of the plateau we might drop a return bridge across, but there is
none within fifty yards. Our united strength could not carry a trunk
which would serve our purpose. The rope, of course, is far too short
that we could descend by it. No, our position is hopeless--hopeless!

CHAPTER X

"The most Wonderful Things have Happened"

The most wonderful things have happened and are continually happening
to us. All the paper that I possess consists of five old note-books
and a lot of scraps, and I have only the one stylographic pencil; but
so long as I can move my hand I will continue to set down our
experiences and impressions, for, since we are the only men of the
whole human race to see such things, it is of enormous importance that
I should record them whilst they are fresh in my memory and before that
fate which seems to be constantly impending does actually overtake us.
Whether Zambo can at last take these letters to the river, or whether I
shall myself in some miraculous way carry them back with me, or,
finally, whether some daring explorer, coming upon our tracks with the
advantage, perhaps, of a perfected monoplane, should find this bundle
of manuscript, in any case I can see that what I am writing is destined
to immortality as a classic of true adventure.

On the morning after our being trapped upon the plateau by the
villainous Gomez we began a new stage in our experiences. The first
incident in it was not such as to give me a very favorable opinion of
the place to which we had wandered. As I roused myself from a short
nap after day had dawned, my eyes fell upon a most singular appearance
upon my own leg. My trouser had slipped up, exposing a few inches of
my skin above my sock. On this there rested a large, purplish grape.
Astonished at the sight, I leaned forward to pick it off, when, to my
horror, it burst between my finger and thumb, squirting blood in every
direction. My cry of disgust had brought the two professors to my side.

"Most interesting," said Summerlee, bending over my shin. "An enormous
blood-tick, as yet, I believe, unclassified."

"The first-fruits of our labors," said Challenger in his booming,
pedantic fashion. "We cannot do less than call it Ixodes Maloni. The
very small inconvenience of being bitten, my young friend, cannot, I am
sure, weigh with you as against the glorious privilege of having your
name inscribed in the deathless roll of zoology. Unhappily you have
crushed this fine specimen at the moment of satiation."

"Filthy vermin!" I cried.

Professor Challenger raised his great eyebrows in protest, and placed a
soothing paw upon my shoulder.

"You should cultivate the scientific eye and the detached scientific
mind," said he. "To a man of philosophic temperament like myself the
blood-tick, with its lancet-like proboscis and its distending stomach,
is as beautiful a work of Nature as the peacock or, for that matter,
the aurora borealis. It pains me to hear you speak of it in so
unappreciative a fashion. No doubt, with due diligence, we can secure
some other specimen."

"There can be no doubt of that," said Summerlee, grimly, "for one has
just disappeared behind your shirt-collar."

Challenger sprang into the air bellowing like a bull, and tore
frantically at his coat and shirt to get them off. Summerlee and I
laughed so that we could hardly help him. At last we exposed that
monstrous torso (fifty-four inches, by the tailor's tape). His body
was all matted with black hair, out of which jungle we picked the
wandering tick before it had bitten him. But the bushes round were
full of the horrible pests, and it was clear that we must shift our
camp.

But first of all it was necessary to make our arrangements with the
faithful negro, who appeared presently on the pinnacle with a number of
tins of cocoa and biscuits, which he tossed over to us. Of the stores
which remained below he was ordered to retain as much as would keep him
for two months. The Indians were to have the remainder as a reward for
their services and as payment for taking our letters back to the
Amazon. Some hours later we saw them in single file far out upon the
plain, each with a bundle on his head, making their way back along the
path we had come. Zambo occupied our little tent at the base of the
pinnacle, and there he remained, our one link with the world below.

And now we had to decide upon our immediate movements. We shifted our
position from among the tick-laden bushes until we came to a small
clearing thickly surrounded by trees upon all sides. There were some
flat slabs of rock in the center, with an excellent well close by, and
there we sat in cleanly comfort while we made our first plans for the
invasion of this new country. Birds were calling among the
foliage--especially one with a peculiar whooping cry which was new to
us--but beyond these sounds there were no signs of life.

Our first care was to make some sort of list of our own stores, so that
we might know what we had to rely upon. What with the things we had
ourselves brought up and those which Zambo had sent across on the rope,
we were fairly well supplied. Most important of all, in view of the
dangers which might surround us, we had our four rifles and one
thousand three hundred rounds, also a shot-gun, but not more than a
hundred and fifty medium pellet cartridges. In the matter of
provisions we had enough to last for several weeks, with a sufficiency
of tobacco and a few scientific implements, including a large telescope
and a good field-glass. All these things we collected together in the
clearing, and as a first precaution, we cut down with our hatchet and
knives a number of thorny bushes, which we piled round in a circle some
fifteen yards in diameter. This was to be our headquarters for the
time--our place of refuge against sudden danger and the guard-house for
our stores. Fort Challenger, we called it.

It was midday before we had made ourselves secure, but the heat was not
oppressive, and the general character of the plateau, both in its
temperature and in its vegetation, was almost temperate. The beech,
the oak, and even the birch were to be found among the tangle of trees
which girt us in. One huge gingko tree, topping all the others, shot
its great limbs and maidenhair foliage over the fort which we had
constructed. In its shade we continued our discussion, while Lord
John, who had quickly taken command in the hour of action, gave us his
views.

"So long as neither man nor beast has seen or heard us, we are safe,"
said he. "From the time they know we are here our troubles begin.
There are no signs that they have found us out as yet. So our game
surely is to lie low for a time and spy out the land. We want to have
a good look at our neighbors before we get on visitin' terms."

"But we must advance," I ventured to remark.

"By all means, sonny my boy! We will advance. But with common sense.
We must never go so far that we can't get back to our base. Above all,
we must never, unless it is life or death, fire off our guns."

"But YOU fired yesterday," said Summerlee.

"Well, it couldn't be helped. However, the wind was strong and blew
outwards. It is not likely that the sound could have traveled far into
the plateau. By the way, what shall we call this place? I suppose it
is up to us to give it a name?"

There were several suggestions, more or less happy, but Challenger's
was final.

"It can only have one name," said he. "It is called after the pioneer
who discovered it. It is Maple White Land."

Maple White Land it became, and so it is named in that chart which has
become my special task. So it will, I trust, appear in the atlas of
the future.

The peaceful penetration of Maple White Land was the pressing subject
before us. We had the evidence of our own eyes that the place was
inhabited by some unknown creatures, and there was that of Maple
White's sketch-book to show that more dreadful and more dangerous
monsters might still appear. That there might also prove to be human
occupants and that they were of a malevolent character was suggested by
the skeleton impaled upon the bamboos, which could not have got there
had it not been dropped from above. Our situation, stranded without
possibility of escape in such a land, was clearly full of danger, and
our reasons endorsed every measure of caution which Lord John's
experience could suggest. Yet it was surely impossible that we should
halt on the edge of this world of mystery when our very souls were
tingling with impatience to push forward and to pluck the heart from it.

We therefore blocked the entrance to our zareba by filling it up with
several thorny bushes, and left our camp with the stores entirely
surrounded by this protecting hedge. We then slowly and cautiously set
forth into the unknown, following the course of the little stream which
flowed from our spring, as it should always serve us as a guide on our
return.

Hardly had we started when we came across signs that there were indeed
wonders awaiting us. After a few hundred yards of thick forest,
containing many trees which were quite unknown to me, but which
Summerlee, who was the botanist of the party, recognized as forms of
conifera and of cycadaceous plants which have long passed away in the
world below, we entered a region where the stream widened out and
formed a considerable bog. High reeds of a peculiar type grew thickly
before us, which were pronounced to be equisetacea, or mare's-tails,
with tree-ferns scattered amongst them, all of them swaying in a brisk
wind. Suddenly Lord John, who was walking first, halted with uplifted
hand.

"Look at this!" said he. "By George, this must be the trail of the
father of all birds!"

An enormous three-toed track was imprinted in the soft mud before us.
The creature, whatever it was, had crossed the swamp and had passed on
into the forest. We all stopped to examine that monstrous spoor. If
it were indeed a bird--and what animal could leave such a mark?--its
foot was so much larger than an ostrich's that its height upon the same
scale must be enormous. Lord John looked eagerly round him and slipped
two cartridges into his elephant-gun.

"I'll stake my good name as a shikarree," said he, "that the track is a
fresh one. The creature has not passed ten minutes. Look how the
water is still oozing into that deeper print! By Jove! See, here is
the mark of a little one!"

Sure enough, smaller tracks of the same general form were running
parallel to the large ones.

"But what do you make of this?" cried Professor Summerlee,
triumphantly, pointing to what looked like the huge print of a
five-fingered human hand appearing among the three-toed marks.

"Wealden!" cried Challenger, in an ecstasy. "I've seen them in the
Wealden clay. It is a creature walking erect upon three-toed feet, and
occasionally putting one of its five-fingered forepaws upon the ground.
Not a bird, my dear Roxton--not a bird."

"A beast?"

"No; a reptile--a dinosaur. Nothing else could have left such a track.
They puzzled a worthy Sussex doctor some ninety years ago; but who in
the world could have hoped--hoped--to have seen a sight like that?"

His words died away into a whisper, and we all stood in motionless
amazement. Following the tracks, we had left the morass and passed
through a screen of brushwood and trees. Beyond was an open glade, and
in this were five of the most extraordinary creatures that I have ever
seen. Crouching down among the bushes, we observed them at our leisure.

There were, as I say, five of them, two being adults and three young
ones. In size they were enormous. Even the babies were as big as
elephants, while the two large ones were far beyond all creatures I
have ever seen. They had slate-colored skin, which was scaled like a
lizard's and shimmered where the sun shone upon it. All five were
sitting up, balancing themselves upon their broad, powerful tails and
their huge three-toed hind-feet, while with their small five-fingered
front-feet they pulled down the branches upon which they browsed. I do
not know that I can bring their appearance home to you better than by
saying that they looked like monstrous kangaroos, twenty feet in
length, and with skins like black crocodiles.

I do not know how long we stayed motionless gazing at this marvelous
spectacle. A strong wind blew towards us and we were well concealed,
so there was no chance of discovery. From time to time the little ones
played round their parents in unwieldy gambols, the great beasts
bounding into the air and falling with dull thuds upon the earth. The
strength of the parents seemed to be limitless, for one of them, having
some difficulty in reaching a bunch of foliage which grew upon a
considerable-sized tree, put his fore-legs round the trunk and tore it
down as if it had been a sapling. The action seemed, as I thought, to
show not only the great development of its muscles, but also the small
one of its brain, for the whole weight came crashing down upon the top
of it, and it uttered a series of shrill yelps to show that, big as it
was, there was a limit to what it could endure. The incident made it
think, apparently, that the neighborhood was dangerous, for it slowly
lurched off through the wood, followed by its mate and its three
enormous infants. We saw the shimmering slaty gleam of their skins
between the tree-trunks, and their heads undulating high above the
brush-wood. Then they vanished from our sight.

I looked at my comrades. Lord John was standing at gaze with his
finger on the trigger of his elephant-gun, his eager hunter's soul
shining from his fierce eyes. What would he not give for one such head
to place between the two crossed oars above the mantelpiece in his
snuggery at the Albany! And yet his reason held him in, for all our
exploration of the wonders of this unknown land depended upon our
presence being concealed from its inhabitants. The two professors were
in silent ecstasy. In their excitement they had unconsciously seized
each other by the hand, and stood like two little children in the
presence of a marvel, Challenger's cheeks bunched up into a seraphic
smile, and Summerlee's sardonic face softening for the moment into
wonder and reverence.

"Nunc dimittis!" he cried at last. "What will they say in England of
this?"

"My dear Summerlee, I will tell you with great confidence exactly what
they will say in England," said Challenger. "They will say that you
are an infernal liar and a scientific charlatan, exactly as you and
others said of me."

"In the face of photographs?"

"Faked, Summerlee! Clumsily faked!"

"In the face of specimens?"

"Ah, there we may have them! Malone and his filthy Fleet Street crew
may be all yelping our praises yet. August the twenty-eighth--the day
we saw five live iguanodons in a glade of Maple White Land. Put it
down in your diary, my young friend, and send it to your rag."

"And be ready to get the toe-end of the editorial boot in return," said
Lord John. "Things look a bit different from the latitude of London,
young fellah my lad. There's many a man who never tells his
adventures, for he can't hope to be believed. Who's to blame them?
For this will seem a bit of a dream to ourselves in a month or two.
WHAT did you say they were?"

"Iguanodons," said Summerlee. "You'll find their footmarks all over
the Hastings sands, in Kent, and in Sussex. The South of England was
alive with them when there was plenty of good lush green-stuff to keep
them going. Conditions have changed, and the beasts died. Here it
seems that the conditions have not changed, and the beasts have lived."

"If ever we get out of this alive, I must have a head with me," said
Lord John. "Lord, how some of that Somaliland-Uganda crowd would turn
a beautiful pea-green if they saw it! I don't know what you chaps
think, but it strikes me that we are on mighty thin ice all this time."

I had the same feeling of mystery and danger around us. In the gloom
of the trees there seemed a constant menace and as we looked up into
their shadowy foliage vague terrors crept into one's heart. It is true
that these monstrous creatures which we had seen were lumbering,
inoffensive brutes which were unlikely to hurt anyone, but in this
world of wonders what other survivals might there not be--what fierce,
active horrors ready to pounce upon us from their lair among the rocks
or brushwood? I knew little of prehistoric life, but I had a clear
remembrance of one book which I had read in which it spoke of creatures
who would live upon our lions and tigers as a cat lives upon mice.
What if these also were to be found in the woods of Maple White Land!

It was destined that on this very morning--our first in the new
country--we were to find out what strange hazards lay around us. It
was a loathsome adventure, and one of which I hate to think. If, as
Lord John said, the glade of the iguanodons will remain with us as a
dream, then surely the swamp of the pterodactyls will forever be our
nightmare. Let me set down exactly what occurred.

We passed very slowly through the woods, partly because Lord Roxton
acted as scout before he would let us advance, and partly because at
every second step one or other of our professors would fall, with a cry
of wonder, before some flower or insect which presented him with a new
type. We may have traveled two or three miles in all, keeping to the
right of the line of the stream, when we came upon a considerable
opening in the trees. A belt of brushwood led up to a tangle of
rocks--the whole plateau was strewn with boulders. We were walking
slowly towards these rocks, among bushes which reached over our waists,
when we became aware of a strange low gabbling and whistling sound,
which filled the air with a constant clamor and appeared to come from
some spot immediately before us. Lord John held up his hand as a
signal for us to stop, and he made his way swiftly, stooping and
running, to the line of rocks. We saw him peep over them and give a
gesture of amazement. Then he stood staring as if forgetting us, so
utterly entranced was he by what he saw. Finally he waved us to come
on, holding up his hand as a signal for caution. His whole bearing
made me feel that something wonderful but dangerous lay before us.

Creeping to his side, we looked over the rocks. The place into which
we gazed was a pit, and may, in the early days, have been one of the
smaller volcanic blow-holes of the plateau. It was bowl-shaped and at
the bottom, some hundreds of yards from where we lay, were pools of
green-scummed, stagnant water, fringed with bullrushes. It was a weird
place in itself, but its occupants made it seem like a scene from the
Seven Circles of Dante. The place was a rookery of pterodactyls.
There were hundreds of them congregated within view. All the bottom
area round the water-edge was alive with their young ones, and with
hideous mothers brooding upon their leathery, yellowish eggs. From
this crawling flapping mass of obscene reptilian life came the shocking
clamor which filled the air and the mephitic, horrible, musty odor
which turned us sick. But above, perched each upon its own stone,
tall, gray, and withered, more like dead and dried specimens than
actual living creatures, sat the horrible males, absolutely motionless
save for the rolling of their red eyes or an occasional snap of their
rat-trap beaks as a dragon-fly went past them. Their huge, membranous
wings were closed by folding their fore-arms, so that they sat like
gigantic old women, wrapped in hideous web-colored shawls, and with
their ferocious heads protruding above them. Large and small, not less
than a thousand of these filthy creatures lay in the hollow before us.

Our professors would gladly have stayed there all day, so entranced
were they by this opportunity of studying the life of a prehistoric
age. They pointed out the fish and dead birds lying about among the
rocks as proving the nature of the food of these creatures, and I heard
them congratulating each other on having cleared up the point why the
bones of this flying dragon are found in such great numbers in certain
well-defined areas, as in the Cambridge Green-sand, since it was now
seen that, like penguins, they lived in gregarious fashion.

Finally, however, Challenger, bent upon proving some point which
Summerlee had contested, thrust his head over the rock and nearly
brought destruction upon us all. In an instant the nearest male gave a
shrill, whistling cry, and flapped its twenty-foot span of leathery
wings as it soared up into the air. The females and young ones huddled
together beside the water, while the whole circle of sentinels rose one
after the other and sailed off into the sky. It was a wonderful sight
to see at least a hundred creatures of such enormous size and hideous
appearance all swooping like swallows with swift, shearing wing-strokes
above us; but soon we realized that it was not one on which we could
afford to linger. At first the great brutes flew round in a huge ring,
as if to make sure what the exact extent of the danger might be. Then,
the flight grew lower and the circle narrower, until they were whizzing
round and round us, the dry, rustling flap of their huge slate-colored
wings filling the air with a volume of sound that made me think of
Hendon aerodrome upon a race day.

"Make for the wood and keep together," cried Lord John, clubbing his
rifle. "The brutes mean mischief."

The moment we attempted to retreat the circle closed in upon us, until
the tips of the wings of those nearest to us nearly touched our faces.
We beat at them with the stocks of our guns, but there was nothing
solid or vulnerable to strike. Then suddenly out of the whizzing,
slate-colored circle a long neck shot out, and a fierce beak made a
thrust at us. Another and another followed. Summerlee gave a cry and
put his hand to his face, from which the blood was streaming. I felt a
prod at the back of my neck, and turned dizzy with the shock.
Challenger fell, and as I stooped to pick him up I was again struck
from behind and dropped on the top of him. At the same instant I heard
the crash of Lord John's elephant-gun, and, looking up, saw one of the
creatures with a broken wing struggling upon the ground, spitting and
gurgling at us with a wide-opened beak and blood-shot, goggled eyes,
like some devil in a medieval picture. Its comrades had flown higher
at the sudden sound, and were circling above our heads.

"Now," cried Lord John, "now for our lives!"

We staggered through the brushwood, and even as we reached the trees
the harpies were on us again. Summerlee was knocked down, but we tore
him up and rushed among the trunks. Once there we were safe, for those
huge wings had no space for their sweep beneath the branches. As we
limped homewards, sadly mauled and discomfited, we saw them for a long
time flying at a great height against the deep blue sky above our
heads, soaring round and round, no bigger than wood-pigeons, with their
eyes no doubt still following our progress. At last, however, as we
reached the thicker woods they gave up the chase, and we saw them no
more.

"A most interesting and convincing experience," said Challenger, as we
halted beside the brook and he bathed a swollen knee. "We are
exceptionally well informed, Summerlee, as to the habits of the enraged
pterodactyl."

Summerlee was wiping the blood from a cut in his forehead, while I was
tying up a nasty stab in the muscle of the neck. Lord John had the
shoulder of his coat torn away, but the creature's teeth had only
grazed the flesh.

"It is worth noting," Challenger continued, "that our young friend has
received an undoubted stab, while Lord John's coat could only have been
torn by a bite. In my own case, I was beaten about the head by their
wings, so we have had a remarkable exhibition of their various methods
of offence."

"It has been touch and go for our lives," said Lord John, gravely, "and
I could not think of a more rotten sort of death than to be outed by
such filthy vermin. I was sorry to fire my rifle, but, by Jove! there
was no great choice."

"We should not be here if you hadn't," said I, with conviction.

"It may do no harm," said he. "Among these woods there must be many
loud cracks from splitting or falling trees which would be just like
the sound of a gun. But now, if you are of my opinion, we have had
thrills enough for one day, and had best get back to the surgical box
at the camp for some carbolic. Who knows what venom these beasts may
have in their hideous jaws?"

But surely no men ever had just such a day since the world began. Some
fresh surprise was ever in store for us. When, following the course of
our brook, we at last reached our glade and saw the thorny barricade of
our camp, we thought that our adventures were at an end. But we had
something more to think of before we could rest. The gate of Fort
Challenger had been untouched, the walls were unbroken, and yet it had
been visited by some strange and powerful creature in our absence. No
foot-mark showed a trace of its nature, and only the overhanging branch
of the enormous ginko tree suggested how it might have come and gone;
but of its malevolent strength there was ample evidence in the
condition of our stores. They were strewn at random all over the
ground, and one tin of meat had been crushed into pieces so as to
extract the contents. A case of cartridges had been shattered into
matchwood, and one of the brass shells lay shredded into pieces beside
it. Again the feeling of vague horror came upon our souls, and we
gazed round with frightened eyes at the dark shadows which lay around
us, in all of which some fearsome shape might be lurking. How good it
was when we were hailed by the voice of Zambo, and, going to the edge
of the plateau, saw him sitting grinning at us upon the top of the
opposite pinnacle.

"All well, Massa Challenger, all well!" he cried. "Me stay here. No
fear. You always find me when you want."

His honest black face, and the immense view before us, which carried us
half-way back to the affluent of the Amazon, helped us to remember that
we really were upon this earth in the twentieth century, and had not by
some magic been conveyed to some raw planet in its earliest and wildest
state. How difficult it was to realize that the violet line upon the
far horizon was well advanced to that great river upon which huge
steamers ran, and folk talked of the small affairs of life, while we,
marooned among the creatures of a bygone age, could but gaze towards it
and yearn for all that it meant!

One other memory remains with me of this wonderful day, and with it I
will close this letter. The two professors, their tempers aggravated
no doubt by their injuries, had fallen out as to whether our assailants
were of the genus pterodactylus or dimorphodon, and high words had
ensued. To avoid their wrangling I moved some little way apart, and
was seated smoking upon the trunk of a fallen tree, when Lord John
strolled over in my direction.

"I say, Malone," said he, "do you remember that place where those
beasts were?"

"Very clearly."

"A sort of volcanic pit, was it not?"

"Exactly," said I.

"Did you notice the soil?"

"Rocks."

"But round the water--where the reeds were?"

"It was a bluish soil. It looked like clay."

"Exactly. A volcanic tube full of blue clay."

"What of that?" I asked.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," said he, and strolled back to where the voices
of the contending men of science rose in a prolonged duet, the high,
strident note of Summerlee rising and falling to the sonorous bass of
Challenger. I should have thought no more of Lord John's remark were
it not that once again that night I heard him mutter to himself: "Blue
clay--clay in a volcanic tube!" They were the last words I heard before
I dropped into an exhausted sleep.

CHAPTER XI

"For once I was the Hero"

Lord John Roxton was right when he thought that some specially toxic
quality might lie in the bite of the horrible creatures which had
attacked us. On the morning after our first adventure upon the
plateau, both Summerlee and I were in great pain and fever, while
Challenger's knee was so bruised that he could hardly limp. We kept to
our camp all day, therefore, Lord John busying himself, with such help
as we could give him, in raising the height and thickness of the thorny
walls which were our only defense. I remember that during the whole
long day I was haunted by the feeling that we were closely observed,
though by whom or whence I could give no guess.

So strong was the impression that I told Professor Challenger of it,
who put it down to the cerebral excitement caused by my fever. Again
and again I glanced round swiftly, with the conviction that I was about
to see something, but only to meet the dark tangle of our hedge or the
solemn and cavernous gloom of the great trees which arched above our
heads. And yet the feeling grew ever stronger in my own mind that
something observant and something malevolent was at our very elbow. I
thought of the Indian superstition of the Curupuri--the dreadful,
lurking spirit of the woods--and I could have imagined that his
terrible presence haunted those who had invaded his most remote and
sacred retreat.

That night (our third in Maple White Land) we had an experience which
left a fearful impression upon our minds, and made us thankful that
Lord John had worked so hard in making our retreat impregnable. We
were all sleeping round our dying fire when we were aroused--or,
rather, I should say, shot out of our slumbers--by a succession of the
most frightful cries and screams to which I have ever listened. I know
no sound to which I could compare this amazing tumult, which seemed to
come from some spot within a few hundred yards of our camp. It was as
ear-splitting as any whistle of a railway-engine; but whereas the
whistle is a clear, mechanical, sharp-edged sound, this was far deeper
in volume and vibrant with the uttermost strain of agony and horror.
We clapped our hands to our ears to shut out that nerve-shaking appeal.
A cold sweat broke out over my body, and my heart turned sick at the
misery of it. All the woes of tortured life, all its stupendous
indictment of high heaven, its innumerable sorrows, seemed to be
centered and condensed into that one dreadful, agonized cry. And then,
under this high-pitched, ringing sound there was another, more
intermittent, a low, deep-chested laugh, a growling, throaty gurgle of
merriment which formed a grotesque accompaniment to the shriek with
which it was blended. For three or four minutes on end the fearsome
duet continued, while all the foliage rustled with the rising of
startled birds. Then it shut off as suddenly as it began. For a long
time we sat in horrified silence. Then Lord John threw a bundle of
twigs upon the fire, and their red glare lit up the intent faces of my
companions and flickered over the great boughs above our heads.

"What was it?" I whispered.

"We shall know in the morning," said Lord John. "It was close to
us--not farther than the glade."

"We have been privileged to overhear a prehistoric tragedy, the sort of
drama which occurred among the reeds upon the border of some Jurassic
lagoon, when the greater dragon pinned the lesser among the slime,"
said Challenger, with more solemnity than I had ever heard in his
voice. "It was surely well for man that he came late in the order of
creation. There were powers abroad in earlier days which no courage
and no mechanism of his could have met. What could his sling, his
throwing-stick, or his arrow avail him against such forces as have been
loose to-night? Even with a modern rifle it would be all odds on the
monster."

"I think I should back my little friend," said Lord John, caressing his
Express. "But the beast would certainly have a good sporting chance."

Summerlee raised his hand.

"Hush!" he cried. "Surely I hear something?"

From the utter silence there emerged a deep, regular pat-pat. It was
the tread of some animal--the rhythm of soft but heavy pads placed
cautiously upon the ground. It stole slowly round the camp, and then
halted near our gateway. There was a low, sibilant rise and fall--the
breathing of the creature. Only our feeble hedge separated us from
this horror of the night. Each of us had seized his rifle, and Lord
John had pulled out a small bush to make an embrasure in the hedge.

"By George!" he whispered. "I think I can see it!"

I stooped and peered over his shoulder through the gap. Yes, I could
see it, too. In the deep shadow of the tree there was a deeper shadow
yet, black, inchoate, vague--a crouching form full of savage vigor and
menace. It was no higher than a horse, but the dim outline suggested
vast bulk and strength. That hissing pant, as regular and full-volumed
as the exhaust of an engine, spoke of a monstrous organism. Once, as
it moved, I thought I saw the glint of two terrible, greenish eyes.
There was an uneasy rustling, as if it were crawling slowly forward.

"I believe it is going to spring!" said I, cocking my rifle.

"Don't fire! Don't fire!" whispered Lord John. "The crash of a gun in
this silent night would be heard for miles. Keep it as a last card."

"If it gets over the hedge we're done," said Summerlee, and his voice
crackled into a nervous laugh as he spoke.

"No, it must not get over," cried Lord John; "but hold your fire to the
last. Perhaps I can make something of the fellow. I'll chance it,
anyhow."

It was as brave an act as ever I saw a man do. He stooped to the fire,
picked up a blazing branch, and slipped in an instant through a
sallyport which he had made in our gateway. The thing moved forward
with a dreadful snarl. Lord John never hesitated, but, running towards
it with a quick, light step, he dashed the flaming wood into the
brute's face. For one moment I had a vision of a horrible mask like a
giant toad's, of a warty, leprous skin, and of a loose mouth all
beslobbered with fresh blood. The next, there was a crash in the
underwood and our dreadful visitor was gone.

"I thought he wouldn't face the fire," said Lord John, laughing, as he
came back and threw his branch among the faggots.

"You should not have taken such a risk!" we all cried.

"There was nothin' else to be done. If he had got among us we should
have shot each other in tryin' to down him. On the other hand, if we
had fired through the hedge and wounded him he would soon have been on
the top of us--to say nothin' of giving ourselves away. On the whole,
I think that we are jolly well out of it. What was he, then?"

Our learned men looked at each other with some hesitation.

"Personally, I am unable to classify the creature with any certainty,"
said Summerlee, lighting his pipe from the fire.

"In refusing to commit yourself you are but showing a proper scientific
reserve," said Challenger, with massive condescension. "I am not
myself prepared to go farther than to say in general terms that we have
almost certainly been in contact to-night with some form of carnivorous
dinosaur. I have already expressed my anticipation that something of
the sort might exist upon this plateau."

"We have to bear in mind," remarked Summerlee, "that there are many
prehistoric forms which have never come down to us. It would be rash
to suppose that we can give a name to all that we are likely to meet."

"Exactly. A rough classification may be the best that we can attempt.
To-morrow some further evidence may help us to an identification.
Meantime we can only renew our interrupted slumbers."

"But not without a sentinel," said Lord John, with decision. "We can't
afford to take chances in a country like this. Two-hour spells in the
future, for each of us."

"Then I'll just finish my pipe in starting the first one," said
Professor Summerlee; and from that time onwards we never trusted
ourselves again without a watchman.

In the morning it was not long before we discovered the source of the
hideous uproar which had aroused us in the night. The iguanodon glade
was the scene of a horrible butchery. From the pools of blood and the
enormous lumps of flesh scattered in every direction over the green
sward we imagined at first that a number of animals had been killed,
but on examining the remains more closely we discovered that all this
carnage came from one of these unwieldy monsters, which had been
literally torn to pieces by some creature not larger, perhaps, but far
more ferocious, than itself.

Our two professors sat in absorbed argument, examining piece after
piece, which showed the marks of savage teeth and of enormous claws.

"Our judgment must still be in abeyance," said Professor Challenger,
with a huge slab of whitish-colored flesh across his knee. "The
indications would be consistent with the presence of a saber-toothed
tiger, such as are still found among the breccia of our caverns; but
the creature actually seen was undoubtedly of a larger and more
reptilian character. Personally, I should pronounce for allosaurus."

"Or megalosaurus," said Summerlee.

"Exactly. Any one of the larger carnivorous dinosaurs would meet the
case. Among them are to be found all the most terrible types of animal
life that have ever cursed the earth or blessed a museum." He laughed
sonorously at his own conceit, for, though he had little sense of
humor, the crudest pleasantry from his own lips moved him always to
roars of appreciation.

"The less noise the better," said Lord Roxton, curtly. "We don't know
who or what may be near us. If this fellah comes back for his
breakfast and catches us here we won't have so much to laugh at. By
the way, what is this mark upon the iguanodon's hide?"

On the dull, scaly, slate-colored skin somewhere above the shoulder,
there was a singular black circle of some substance which looked like
asphalt. None of us could suggest what it meant, though Summerlee was
of opinion that he had seen something similar upon one of the young
ones two days before. Challenger said nothing, but looked pompous and
puffy, as if he could if he would, so that finally Lord John asked his
opinion direct.

"If your lordship will graciously permit me to open my mouth, I shall
be happy to express my sentiments," said he, with elaborate sarcasm.
"I am not in the habit of being taken to task in the fashion which
seems to be customary with your lordship. I was not aware that it was
necessary to ask your permission before smiling at a harmless
pleasantry."

It was not until he had received his apology that our touchy friend
would suffer himself to be appeased. When at last his ruffled feelings
were at ease, he addressed us at some length from his seat upon a
fallen tree, speaking, as his habit was, as if he were imparting most
precious information to a class of a thousand.

"With regard to the marking," said he, "I am inclined to agree with my
friend and colleague, Professor Summerlee, that the stains are from
asphalt. As this plateau is, in its very nature, highly volcanic, and
as asphalt is a substance which one associates with Plutonic forces, I
cannot doubt that it exists in the free liquid state, and that the
creatures may have come in contact with it. A much more important
problem is the question as to the existence of the carnivorous monster
which has left its traces in this glade. We know roughly that this
plateau is not larger than an average English county. Within this
confined space a certain number of creatures, mostly types which have
passed away in the world below, have lived together for innumerable
years. Now, it is very clear to me that in so long a period one would
have expected that the carnivorous creatures, multiplying unchecked,
would have exhausted their food supply and have been compelled to
either modify their flesh-eating habits or die of hunger. This we see
has not been so. We can only imagine, therefore, that the balance of
Nature is preserved by some check which limits the numbers of these
ferocious creatures. One of the many interesting problems, therefore,
which await our solution is to discover what that check may be and how
it operates. I venture to trust that we may have some future
opportunity for the closer study of the carnivorous dinosaurs."

"And I venture to trust we may not," I observed.

The Professor only raised his great eyebrows, as the schoolmaster meets
the irrelevant observation of the naughty boy.

"Perhaps Professor Summerlee may have an observation to make," he said,
and the two savants ascended together into some rarefied scientific
atmosphere, where the possibilities of a modification of the birth-rate
were weighed against the decline of the food supply as a check in the
struggle for existence.

That morning we mapped out a small portion of the plateau, avoiding the
swamp of the pterodactyls, and keeping to the east of our brook instead
of to the west. In that direction the country was still thickly
wooded, with so much undergrowth that our progress was very slow.

I have dwelt up to now upon the terrors of Maple White Land; but there
was another side to the subject, for all that morning we wandered among
lovely flowers--mostly, as I observed, white or yellow in color, these
being, as our professors explained, the primitive flower-shades. In
many places the ground was absolutely covered with them, and as we
walked ankle-deep on that wonderful yielding carpet, the scent was
almost intoxicating in its sweetness and intensity. The homely English
bee buzzed everywhere around us. Many of the trees under which we
passed had their branches bowed down with fruit, some of which were of
familiar sorts, while other varieties were new. By observing which of
them were pecked by the birds we avoided all danger of poison and added
a delicious variety to our food reserve. In the jungle which we
traversed were numerous hard-trodden paths made by the wild beasts, and
in the more marshy places we saw a profusion of strange footmarks,
including many of the iguanodon. Once in a grove we observed several
of these great creatures grazing, and Lord John, with his glass, was
able to report that they also were spotted with asphalt, though in a
different place to the one which we had examined in the morning. What
this phenomenon meant we could not imagine.

We saw many small animals, such as porcupines, a scaly ant-eater, and a
wild pig, piebald in color and with long curved tusks. Once, through a
break in the trees, we saw a clear shoulder of green hill some distance
away, and across this a large dun-colored animal was traveling at a
considerable pace. It passed so swiftly that we were unable to say
what it was; but if it were a deer, as was claimed by Lord John, it
must have been as large as those monstrous Irish elk which are still
dug up from time to time in the bogs of my native land.

Ever since the mysterious visit which had been paid to our camp we
always returned to it with some misgivings. However, on this occasion
we found everything in order.

That evening we had a grand discussion upon our present situation and
future plans, which I must describe at some length, as it led to a new
departure by which we were enabled to gain a more complete knowledge of
Maple White Land than might have come in many weeks of exploring. It
was Summerlee who opened the debate. All day he had been querulous in
manner, and now some remark of Lord John's as to what we should do on
the morrow brought all his bitterness to a head.

"What we ought to be doing to-day, to-morrow, and all the time," said
he, "is finding some way out of the trap into which we have fallen.
You are all turning your brains towards getting into this country. I
say that we should be scheming how to get out of it."

"I am surprised, sir," boomed Challenger, stroking his majestic beard,
"that any man of science should commit himself to so ignoble a
sentiment. You are in a land which offers such an inducement to the
ambitious naturalist as none ever has since the world began, and you
suggest leaving it before we have acquired more than the most
superficial knowledge of it or of its contents. I expected better
things of you, Professor Summerlee."

"You must remember," said Summerlee, sourly, "that I have a large class
in London who are at present at the mercy of an extremely inefficient
locum tenens. This makes my situation different from yours, Professor
Challenger, since, so far as I know, you have never been entrusted with
any responsible educational work."

"Quite so," said Challenger. "I have felt it to be a sacrilege to
divert a brain which is capable of the highest original research to any
lesser object. That is why I have sternly set my face against any
proffered scholastic appointment."

"For example?" asked Summerlee, with a sneer; but Lord John hastened to
change the conversation.

"I must say," said he, "that I think it would be a mighty poor thing to
go back to London before I know a great deal more of this place than I
do at present."

"I could never dare to walk into the back office of my paper and face
old McArdle," said I. (You will excuse the frankness of this report,
will you not, sir?) "He'd never forgive me for leaving such
unexhausted copy behind me. Besides, so far as I can see it is not
worth discussing, since we can't get down, even if we wanted."

"Our young friend makes up for many obvious mental lacunae by some
measure of primitive common sense," remarked Challenger. "The
interests of his deplorable profession are immaterial to us; but, as he
observes, we cannot get down in any case, so it is a waste of energy to
discuss it."

"It is a waste of energy to do anything else," growled Summerlee from
behind his pipe. "Let me remind you that we came here upon a perfectly
definite mission, entrusted to us at the meeting of the Zoological
Institute in London. That mission was to test the truth of Professor
Challenger's statements. Those statements, as I am bound to admit, we
are now in a position to endorse. Our ostensible work is therefore
done. As to the detail which remains to be worked out upon this
plateau, it is so enormous that only a large expedition, with a very
special equipment, could hope to cope with it. Should we attempt to do
so ourselves, the only possible result must be that we shall never
return with the important contribution to science which we have already
gained. Professor Challenger has devised means for getting us on to
this plateau when it appeared to be inaccessible; I think that we
should now call upon him to use the same ingenuity in getting us back
to the world from which we came."

I confess that as Summerlee stated his view it struck me as altogether
reasonable. Even Challenger was affected by the consideration that his
enemies would never stand confuted if the confirmation of his
statements should never reach those who had doubted them.

"The problem of the descent is at first sight a formidable one," said
he, "and yet I cannot doubt that the intellect can solve it. I am
prepared to agree with our colleague that a protracted stay in Maple
White Land is at present inadvisable, and that the question of our
return will soon have to be faced. I absolutely refuse to leave,
however, until we have made at least a superficial examination of this
country, and are able to take back with us something in the nature of a
chart."

Professor Summerlee gave a snort of impatience.

"We have spent two long days in exploration," said he, "and we are no
wiser as to the actual geography of the place than when we started. It
is clear that it is all thickly wooded, and it would take months to
penetrate it and to learn the relations of one part to another. If
there were some central peak it would be different, but it all slopes
downwards, so far as we can see. The farther we go the less likely it
is that we will get any general view."

It was at that moment that I had my inspiration. My eyes chanced to
light upon the enormous gnarled trunk of the gingko tree which cast its
huge branches over us. Surely, if its bole exceeded that of all
others, its height must do the same. If the rim of the plateau was
indeed the highest point, then why should this mighty tree not prove to
be a watchtower which commanded the whole country? Now, ever since I
ran wild as a lad in Ireland I have been a bold and skilled
tree-climber. My comrades might be my masters on the rocks, but I knew
that I would be supreme among those branches. Could I only get my legs
on to the lowest of the giant off-shoots, then it would be strange
indeed if I could not make my way to the top. My comrades were
delighted at my idea.

"Our young friend," said Challenger, bunching up the red apples of his
cheeks, "is capable of acrobatic exertions which would be impossible to
a man of a more solid, though possibly of a more commanding,
appearance. I applaud his resolution."

"By George, young fellah, you've put your hand on it!" said Lord John,
clapping me on the back. "How we never came to think of it before I
can't imagine! There's not more than an hour of daylight left, but if
you take your notebook you may be able to get some rough sketch of the
place. If we put these three ammunition cases under the branch, I will
soon hoist you on to it."

He stood on the boxes while I faced the trunk, and was gently raising
me when Challenger sprang forward and gave me such a thrust with his
huge hand that he fairly shot me into the tree. With both arms
clasping the branch, I scrambled hard with my feet until I had worked,
first my body, and then my knees, onto it. There were three excellent
off-shoots, like huge rungs of a ladder, above my head, and a tangle of
convenient branches beyond, so that I clambered onwards with such speed
that I soon lost sight of the ground and had nothing but foliage
beneath me. Now and then I encountered a check, and once I had to shin
up a creeper for eight or ten feet, but I made excellent progress, and
the booming of Challenger's voice seemed to be a great distance beneath
me. The tree was, however, enormous, and, looking upwards, I could see
no thinning of the leaves above my head. There was some thick,
bush-like clump which seemed to be a parasite upon a branch up which I
was swarming. I leaned my head round it in order to see what was
beyond, and I nearly fell out of the tree in my surprise and horror at
what I saw.

A face was gazing into mine--at the distance of only a foot or two.
The creature that owned it had been crouching behind the parasite, and
had looked round it at the same instant that I did. It was a human
face--or at least it was far more human than any monkey's that I have
ever seen. It was long, whitish, and blotched with pimples, the nose
flattened, and the lower jaw projecting, with a bristle of coarse
whiskers round the chin. The eyes, which were under thick and heavy
brows, were bestial and ferocious, and as it opened its mouth to snarl
what sounded like a curse at me I observed that it had curved, sharp
canine teeth. For an instant I read hatred and menace in the evil
eyes. Then, as quick as a flash, came an expression of overpowering
fear. There was a crash of broken boughs as it dived wildly down into
the tangle of green. I caught a glimpse of a hairy body like that of a
reddish pig, and then it was gone amid a swirl of leaves and branches.

"What's the matter?" shouted Roxton from below. "Anything wrong with
you?"

"Did you see it?" I cried, with my arms round the branch and all my
nerves tingling.

"We heard a row, as if your foot had slipped. What was it?"

I was so shocked at the sudden and strange appearance of this ape-man
that I hesitated whether I should not climb down again and tell my
experience to my companions. But I was already so far up the great
tree that it seemed a humiliation to return without having carried out
my mission.

After a long pause, therefore, to recover my breath and my courage, I
continued my ascent. Once I put my weight upon a rotten branch and
swung for a few seconds by my hands, but in the main it was all easy
climbing. Gradually the leaves thinned around me, and I was aware,
from the wind upon my face, that I had topped all the trees of the
forest. I was determined, however, not to look about me before I had
reached the very highest point, so I scrambled on until I had got so
far that the topmost branch was bending beneath my weight. There I
settled into a convenient fork, and, balancing myself securely, I found
myself looking down at a most wonderful panorama of this strange
country in which we found ourselves.

The sun was just above the western sky-line, and the evening was a
particularly bright and clear one, so that the whole extent of the
plateau was visible beneath me. It was, as seen from this height, of
an oval contour, with a breadth of about thirty miles and a width of
twenty. Its general shape was that of a shallow funnel, all the sides
sloping down to a considerable lake in the center. This lake may have
been ten miles in circumference, and lay very green and beautiful in
the evening light, with a thick fringe of reeds at its edges, and with
its surface broken by several yellow sandbanks, which gleamed golden in
the mellow sunshine. A number of long dark objects, which were too
large for alligators and too long for canoes, lay upon the edges of
these patches of sand. With my glass I could clearly see that they
were alive, but what their nature might be I could not imagine.

From the side of the plateau on which we were, slopes of woodland, with
occasional glades, stretched down for five or six miles to the central
lake. I could see at my very feet the glade of the iguanodons, and
farther off was a round opening in the trees which marked the swamp of
the pterodactyls. On the side facing me, however, the plateau
presented a very different aspect. There the basalt cliffs of the
outside were reproduced upon the inside, forming an escarpment about
two hundred feet high, with a woody slope beneath it. Along the base
of these red cliffs, some distance above the ground, I could see a
number of dark holes through the glass, which I conjectured to be the
mouths of caves. At the opening of one of these something white was
shimmering, but I was unable to make out what it was. I sat charting
the country until the sun had set and it was so dark that I could no
longer distinguish details. Then I climbed down to my companions
waiting for me so eagerly at the bottom of the great tree. For once I
was the hero of the expedition. Alone I had thought of it, and alone I
had done it; and here was the chart which would save us a month's blind
groping among unknown dangers. Each of them shook me solemnly by the
hand.

But before they discussed the details of my map I had to tell them of
my encounter with the ape-man among the branches.

"He has been there all the time," said I.

"How do you know that?" asked Lord John.

"Because I have never been without that feeling that something
malevolent was watching us. I mentioned it to you, Professor
Challenger."

"Our young friend certainly said something of the kind. He is also the
one among us who is endowed with that Celtic temperament which would
make him sensitive to such impressions."

"The whole theory of telepathy----" began Summerlee, filling his pipe.

"Is too vast to be now discussed," said Challenger, with decision.
"Tell me, now," he added, with the air of a bishop addressing a
Sunday-school, "did you happen to observe whether the creature could
cross its thumb over its palm?"

"No, indeed."

"Had it a tail?"

"No."

"Was the foot prehensile?"

"I do not think it could have made off so fast among the branches if it
could not get a grip with its feet."

"In South America there are, if my memory serves me--you will check the
observation, Professor Summerlee--some thirty-six species of monkeys,
but the anthropoid ape is unknown. It is clear, however, that he
exists in this country, and that he is not the hairy, gorilla-like
variety, which is never seen out of Africa or the East." (I was
inclined to interpolate, as I looked at him, that I had seen his first
cousin in Kensington.) "This is a whiskered and colorless type, the
latter characteristic pointing to the fact that he spends his days in
arboreal seclusion. The question which we have to face is whether he
approaches more closely to the ape or the man. In the latter case, he
may well approximate to what the vulgar have called the 'missing link.'
The solution of this problem is our immediate duty."

"It is nothing of the sort," said Summerlee, abruptly. "Now that,
through the intelligence and activity of Mr. Malone" (I cannot help
quoting the words), "we have got our chart, our one and only immediate
duty is to get ourselves safe and sound out of this awful place."

"The flesh-pots of civilization," groaned Challenger.

"The ink-pots of civilization, sir. It is our task to put on record
what we have seen, and to leave the further exploration to others. You
all agreed as much before Mr. Malone got us the chart."

"Well," said Challenger, "I admit that my mind will be more at ease
when I am assured that the result of our expedition has been conveyed
to our friends. How we are to get down from this place I have not as
yet an idea. I have never yet encountered any problem, however, which
my inventive brain was unable to solve, and I promise you that
to-morrow I will turn my attention to the question of our descent."
And so the matter was allowed to rest.

But that evening, by the light of the fire and of a single candle, the
first map of the lost world was elaborated. Every detail which I had
roughly noted from my watch-tower was drawn out in its relative place.
Challenger's pencil hovered over the great blank which marked the lake.

"What shall we call it?" he asked.

"Why should you not take the chance of perpetuating your own name?"
said Summerlee, with his usual touch of acidity.

"I trust, sir, that my name will have other and more personal claims
upon posterity," said Challenger, severely. "Any ignoramus can hand
down his worthless memory by imposing it upon a mountain or a river. I
need no such monument."

Summerlee, with a twisted smile, was about to make some fresh assault
when Lord John hastened to intervene.

"It's up to you, young fellah, to name the lake," said he. "You saw it
first, and, by George, if you choose to put 'Lake Malone' on it, no one
has a better right."

"By all means. Let our young friend give it a name," said Challenger.

"Then," said I, blushing, I dare say, as I said it, "let it be named
Lake Gladys."

"Don't you think the Central Lake would be more descriptive?" remarked
Summerlee.

"I should prefer Lake Gladys."

Challenger looked at me sympathetically, and shook his great head in
mock disapproval. "Boys will be boys," said he. "Lake Gladys let it
be."

CHAPTER XII

"It was Dreadful in the Forest"

I have said--or perhaps I have not said, for my memory plays me sad
tricks these days--that I glowed with pride when three such men as my
comrades thanked me for having saved, or at least greatly helped, the
situation. As the youngster of the party, not merely in years, but in
experience, character, knowledge, and all that goes to make a man, I
had been overshadowed from the first. And now I was coming into my
own. I warmed at the thought. Alas! for the pride which goes before a
fall! That little glow of self-satisfaction, that added measure of
self-confidence, were to lead me on that very night to the most
dreadful experience of my life, ending with a shock which turns my
heart sick when I think of it.

It came about in this way. I had been unduly excited by the adventure
of the tree, and sleep seemed to be impossible. Summerlee was on
guard, sitting hunched over our small fire, a quaint, angular figure,
his rifle across his knees and his pointed, goat-like beard wagging
with each weary nod of his head. Lord John lay silent, wrapped in the
South American poncho which he wore, while Challenger snored with a
roll and rattle which reverberated through the woods. The full moon
was shining brightly, and the air was crisply cold. What a night for a
walk! And then suddenly came the thought, "Why not?" Suppose I stole
softly away, suppose I made my way down to the central lake, suppose I
was back at breakfast with some record of the place--would I not in
that case be thought an even more worthy associate? Then, if Summerlee
carried the day and some means of escape were found, we should return
to London with first-hand knowledge of the central mystery of the
plateau, to which I alone, of all men, would have penetrated. I thought
of Gladys, with her "There are heroisms all round us." I seemed to hear
her voice as she said it. I thought also of McArdle. What a three
column article for the paper! What a foundation for a career! A
correspondentship in the next great war might be within my reach. I
clutched at a gun--my pockets were full of cartridges--and, parting the
thorn bushes at the gate of our zareba, quickly slipped out. My last
glance showed me the unconscious Summerlee, most futile of sentinels,
still nodding away like a queer mechanical toy in front of the
smouldering fire.

I had not gone a hundred yards before I deeply repented my rashness. I
may have said somewhere in this chronicle that I am too imaginative to
be a really courageous man, but that I have an overpowering fear of
seeming afraid. This was the power which now carried me onwards. I
simply could not slink back with nothing done. Even if my comrades
should not have missed me, and should never know of my weakness, there
would still remain some intolerable self-shame in my own soul. And yet
I shuddered at the position in which I found myself, and would have
given all I possessed at that moment to have been honorably free of the
whole business.

It was dreadful in the forest. The trees grew so thickly and their
foliage spread so widely that I could see nothing of the moon-light
save that here and there the high branches made a tangled filigree
against the starry sky. As the eyes became more used to the obscurity
one learned that there were different degrees of darkness among the
trees--that some were dimly visible, while between and among them there
were coal-black shadowed patches, like the mouths of caves, from which
I shrank in horror as I passed. I thought of the despairing yell of
the tortured iguanodon--that dreadful cry which had echoed through the
woods. I thought, too, of the glimpse I had in the light of Lord
John's torch of that bloated, warty, blood-slavering muzzle. Even now
I was on its hunting-ground. At any instant it might spring upon me
from the shadows--this nameless and horrible monster. I stopped, and,
picking a cartridge from my pocket, I opened the breech of my gun. As
I touched the lever my heart leaped within me. It was the shot-gun,
not the rifle, which I had taken!

Again the impulse to return swept over me. Here, surely, was a most
excellent reason for my failure--one for which no one would think the
less of me. But again the foolish pride fought against that very word.
I could not--must not--fail. After all, my rifle would probably have
been as useless as a shot-gun against such dangers as I might meet. If
I were to go back to camp to change my weapon I could hardly expect to
enter and to leave again without being seen. In that case there would
be explanations, and my attempt would no longer be all my own. After a
little hesitation, then, I screwed up my courage and continued upon my
way, my useless gun under my arm.

The darkness of the forest had been alarming, but even worse was the
white, still flood of moonlight in the open glade of the iguanodons.
Hid among the bushes, I looked out at it. None of the great brutes
were in sight. Perhaps the tragedy which had befallen one of them had
driven them from their feeding-ground. In the misty, silvery night I
could see no sign of any living thing. Taking courage, therefore, I
slipped rapidly across it, and among the jungle on the farther side I
picked up once again the brook which was my guide. It was a cheery
companion, gurgling and chuckling as it ran, like the dear old
trout-stream in the West Country where I have fished at night in my
boyhood. So long as I followed it down I must come to the lake, and so
long as I followed it back I must come to the camp. Often I had to
lose sight of it on account of the tangled brush-wood, but I was always
within earshot of its tinkle and splash.

As one descended the slope the woods became thinner, and bushes, with
occasional high trees, took the place of the forest. I could make good
progress, therefore, and I could see without being seen. I passed
close to the pterodactyl swamp, and as I did so, with a dry, crisp,
leathery rattle of wings, one of these great creatures--it was twenty
feet at least from tip to tip--rose up from somewhere near me and
soared into the air. As it passed across the face of the moon the
light shone clearly through the membranous wings, and it looked like a
flying skeleton against the white, tropical radiance. I crouched low
among the bushes, for I knew from past experience that with a single
cry the creature could bring a hundred of its loathsome mates about my
ears. It was not until it had settled again that I dared to steal
onwards upon my journey.

The night had been exceedingly still, but as I advanced I became
conscious of a low, rumbling sound, a continuous murmur, somewhere in
front of me. This grew louder as I proceeded, until at last it was
clearly quite close to me. When I stood still the sound was constant,
so that it seemed to come from some stationary cause. It was like a
boiling kettle or the bubbling of some great pot. Soon I came upon the
source of it, for in the center of a small clearing I found a lake--or
a pool, rather, for it was not larger than the basin of the Trafalgar
Square fountain--of some black, pitch-like stuff, the surface of which
rose and fell in great blisters of bursting gas. The air above it was
shimmering with heat, and the ground round was so hot that I could
hardly bear to lay my hand on it. It was clear that the great volcanic
outburst which had raised this strange plateau so many years ago had
not yet entirely spent its forces. Blackened rocks and mounds of lava
I had already seen everywhere peeping out from amid the luxuriant
vegetation which draped them, but this asphalt pool in the jungle was
the first sign that we had of actual existing activity on the slopes of
the ancient crater. I had no time to examine it further for I had need
to hurry if I were to be back in camp in the morning.

It was a fearsome walk, and one which will be with me so long as memory
holds. In the great moonlight clearings I slunk along among the
shadows on the margin. In the jungle I crept forward, stopping with a
beating heart whenever I heard, as I often did, the crash of breaking
branches as some wild beast went past. Now and then great shadows
loomed up for an instant and were gone--great, silent shadows which
seemed to prowl upon padded feet. How often I stopped with the
intention of returning, and yet every time my pride conquered my fear,
and sent me on again until my object should be attained.

At last (my watch showed that it was one in the morning) I saw the
gleam of water amid the openings of the jungle, and ten minutes later I
was among the reeds upon the borders of the central lake. I was
exceedingly dry, so I lay down and took a long draught of its waters,
which were fresh and cold. There was a broad pathway with many tracks
upon it at the spot which I had found, so that it was clearly one of
the drinking-places of the animals. Close to the water's edge there
was a huge isolated block of lava. Up this I climbed, and, lying on
the top, I had an excellent view in every direction.

The first thing which I saw filled me with amazement. When I described
the view from the summit of the great tree, I said that on the farther
cliff I could see a number of dark spots, which appeared to be the
mouths of caves. Now, as I looked up at the same cliffs, I saw discs
of light in every direction, ruddy, clearly-defined patches, like the
port-holes of a liner in the darkness. For a moment I thought it was
the lava-glow from some volcanic action; but this could not be so. Any
volcanic action would surely be down in the hollow and not high among
the rocks. What, then, was the alternative? It was wonderful, and yet
it must surely be. These ruddy spots must be the reflection of fires
within the caves--fires which could only be lit by the hand of man.
There were human beings, then, upon the plateau. How gloriously my
expedition was justified! Here was news indeed for us to bear back
with us to London!

For a long time I lay and watched these red, quivering blotches of
light. I suppose they were ten miles off from me, yet even at that
distance one could observe how, from time to time, they twinkled or
were obscured as someone passed before them. What would I not have
given to be able to crawl up to them, to peep in, and to take back some
word to my comrades as to the appearance and character of the race who
lived in so strange a place! It was out of the question for the
moment, and yet surely we could not leave the plateau until we had some
definite knowledge upon the point.

Lake Gladys--my own lake--lay like a sheet of quicksilver before me,
with a reflected moon shining brightly in the center of it. It was
shallow, for in many places I saw low sandbanks protruding above the
water. Everywhere upon the still surface I could see signs of life,
sometimes mere rings and ripples in the water, sometimes the gleam of a
great silver-sided fish in the air, sometimes the arched, slate-colored
back of some passing monster. Once upon a yellow sandbank I saw a
creature like a huge swan, with a clumsy body and a high, flexible
neck, shuffling about upon the margin. Presently it plunged in, and
for some time I could see the arched neck and darting head undulating
over the water. Then it dived, and I saw it no more.

My attention was soon drawn away from these distant sights and brought
back to what was going on at my very feet. Two creatures like large
armadillos had come down to the drinking-place, and were squatting at
the edge of the water, their long, flexible tongues like red ribbons
shooting in and out as they lapped. A huge deer, with branching horns,
a magnificent creature which carried itself like a king, came down with
its doe and two fawns and drank beside the armadillos. No such deer
exist anywhere else upon earth, for the moose or elks which I have seen
would hardly have reached its shoulders. Presently it gave a warning
snort, and was off with its family among the reeds, while the
armadillos also scuttled for shelter. A new-comer, a most monstrous
animal, was coming down the path.

For a moment I wondered where I could have seen that ungainly shape,
that arched back with triangular fringes along it, that strange
bird-like head held close to the ground. Then it came back, to me. It
was the stegosaurus--the very creature which Maple White had preserved
in his sketch-book, and which had been the first object which arrested
the attention of Challenger! There he was--perhaps the very specimen
which the American artist had encountered. The ground shook beneath
his tremendous weight, and his gulpings of water resounded through the
still night. For five minutes he was so close to my rock that by
stretching out my hand I could have touched the hideous waving hackles
upon his back. Then he lumbered away and was lost among the boulders.

Looking at my watch, I saw that it was half-past two o'clock, and high
time, therefore, that I started upon my homeward journey. There was no
difficulty about the direction in which I should return for all along I
had kept the little brook upon my left, and it opened into the central
lake within a stone's-throw of the boulder upon which I had been lying.
I set off, therefore, in high spirits, for I felt that I had done good
work and was bringing back a fine budget of news for my companions.
Foremost of all, of course, were the sight of the fiery caves and the
certainty that some troglodytic race inhabited them. But besides that
I could speak from experience of the central lake. I could testify
that it was full of strange creatures, and I had seen several land
forms of primeval life which we had not before encountered. I
reflected as I walked that few men in the world could have spent a
stranger night or added more to human knowledge in the course of it.

I was plodding up the slope, turning these thoughts over in my mind,
and had reached a point which may have been half-way to home, when my
mind was brought back to my own position by a strange noise behind me.
It was something between a snore and a growl, low, deep, and
exceedingly menacing. Some strange creature was evidently near me, but
nothing could be seen, so I hastened more rapidly upon my way. I had
traversed half a mile or so when suddenly the sound was repeated, still
behind me, but louder and more menacing than before. My heart stood
still within me as it flashed across me that the beast, whatever it
was, must surely be after ME. My skin grew cold and my hair rose at
the thought. That these monsters should tear each other to pieces was
a part of the strange struggle for existence, but that they should turn
upon modern man, that they should deliberately track and hunt down the
predominant human, was a staggering and fearsome thought. I remembered
again the blood-beslobbered face which we had seen in the glare of Lord
John's torch, like some horrible vision from the deepest circle of
Dante's hell. With my knees shaking beneath me, I stood and glared
with starting eyes down the moonlit path which lay behind me. All was
quiet as in a dream landscape. Silver clearings and the black patches
of the bushes--nothing else could I see. Then from out of the silence,
imminent and threatening, there came once more that low, throaty
croaking, far louder and closer than before. There could no longer be
a doubt. Something was on my trail, and was closing in upon me every
minute.

I stood like a man paralyzed, still staring at the ground which I had
traversed. Then suddenly I saw it. There was movement among the
bushes at the far end of the clearing which I had just traversed. A
great dark shadow disengaged itself and hopped out into the clear
moonlight. I say "hopped" advisedly, for the beast moved like a
kangaroo, springing along in an erect position upon its powerful hind
legs, while its front ones were held bent in front of it. It was of
enormous size and power, like an erect elephant, but its movements, in
spite of its bulk, were exceedingly alert. For a moment, as I saw its
shape, I hoped that it was an iguanodon, which I knew to be harmless,
but, ignorant as I was, I soon saw that this was a very different
creature. Instead of the gentle, deer-shaped head of the great
three-toed leaf-eater, this beast had a broad, squat, toad-like face
like that which had alarmed us in our camp. His ferocious cry and the
horrible energy of his pursuit both assured me that this was surely one
of the great flesh-eating dinosaurs, the most terrible beasts which
have ever walked this earth. As the huge brute loped along it dropped
forward upon its fore-paws and brought its nose to the ground every
twenty yards or so. It was smelling out my trail. Sometimes, for an
instant, it was at fault. Then it would catch it up again and come
bounding swiftly along the path I had taken.

Even now when I think of that nightmare the sweat breaks out upon my
brow. What could I do? My useless fowling-piece was in my hand. What
help could I get from that? I looked desperately round for some rock
or tree, but I was in a bushy jungle with nothing higher than a sapling
within sight, while I knew that the creature behind me could tear down
an ordinary tree as though it were a reed. My only possible chance lay
in flight. I could not move swiftly over the rough, broken ground, but
as I looked round me in despair I saw a well-marked, hard-beaten path
which ran across in front of me. We had seen several of the sort, the
runs of various wild beasts, during our expeditions. Along this I
could perhaps hold my own, for I was a fast runner, and in excellent
condition. Flinging away my useless gun, I set myself to do such a
half-mile as I have never done before or since. My limbs ached, my
chest heaved, I felt that my throat would burst for want of air, and
yet with that horror behind me I ran and I ran and ran. At last I
paused, hardly able to move. For a moment I thought that I had thrown
him off. The path lay still behind me. And then suddenly, with a
crashing and a rending, a thudding of giant feet and a panting of
monster lungs the beast was upon me once more. He was at my very
heels. I was lost.

Madman that I was to linger so long before I fled! Up to then he had
hunted by scent, and his movement was slow. But he had actually seen
me as I started to run. From then onwards he had hunted by sight, for
the path showed him where I had gone. Now, as he came round the curve,
he was springing in great bounds. The moonlight shone upon his huge
projecting eyes, the row of enormous teeth in his open mouth, and the
gleaming fringe of claws upon his short, powerful forearms. With a
scream of terror I turned and rushed wildly down the path. Behind me
the thick, gasping breathing of the creature sounded louder and louder.
His heavy footfall was beside me. Every instant I expected to feel his
grip upon my back. And then suddenly there came a crash--I was falling
through space, and everything beyond was darkness and rest.

As I emerged from my unconsciousness--which could not, I think, have
lasted more than a few minutes--I was aware of a most dreadful and
penetrating smell. Putting out my hand in the darkness I came upon
something which felt like a huge lump of meat, while my other hand
closed upon a large bone. Up above me there was a circle of starlit
sky, which showed me that I was lying at the bottom of a deep pit.
Slowly I staggered to my feet and felt myself all over. I was stiff
and sore from head to foot, but there was no limb which would not move,
no joint which would not bend. As the circumstances of my fall came
back into my confused brain, I looked up in terror, expecting to see
that dreadful head silhouetted against the paling sky. There was no
sign of the monster, however, nor could I hear any sound from above. I
began to walk slowly round, therefore, feeling in every direction to
find out what this strange place could be into which I had been so
opportunely precipitated.

It was, as I have said, a pit, with sharply-sloping walls and a level
bottom about twenty feet across. This bottom was littered with great
gobbets of flesh, most of which was in the last state of putridity.
The atmosphere was poisonous and horrible. After tripping and
stumbling over these lumps of decay, I came suddenly against something
hard, and I found that an upright post was firmly fixed in the center
of the hollow. It was so high that I could not reach the top of it
with my hand, and it appeared to be covered with grease.

Suddenly I remembered that I had a tin box of wax-vestas in my pocket.
Striking one of them, I was able at last to form some opinion of this
place into which I had fallen. There could be no question as to its
nature. It was a trap--made by the hand of man. The post in the
center, some nine feet long, was sharpened at the upper end, and was
black with the stale blood of the creatures who had been impaled upon
it. The remains scattered about were fragments of the victims, which
had been cut away in order to clear the stake for the next who might
blunder in. I remembered that Challenger had declared that man could
not exist upon the plateau, since with his feeble weapons he could not
hold his own against the monsters who roamed over it. But now it was
clear enough how it could be done. In their narrow-mouthed caves the
natives, whoever they might be, had refuges into which the huge
saurians could not penetrate, while with their developed brains they
were capable of setting such traps, covered with branches, across the
paths which marked the run of the animals as would destroy them in
spite of all their strength and activity. Man was always the master.

The sloping wall of the pit was not difficult for an active man to
climb, but I hesitated long before I trusted myself within reach of the
dreadful creature which had so nearly destroyed me. How did I know
that he was not lurking in the nearest clump of bushes, waiting for my
reappearance? I took heart, however, as I recalled a conversation
between Challenger and Summerlee upon the habits of the great saurians.
Both were agreed that the monsters were practically brainless, that
there was no room for reason in their tiny cranial cavities, and that
if they have disappeared from the rest of the world it was assuredly on
account of their own stupidity, which made it impossible for them to
adapt themselves to changing conditions.

To lie in wait for me now would mean that the creature had appreciated
what had happened to me, and this in turn would argue some power
connecting cause and effect. Surely it was more likely that a
brainless creature, acting solely by vague predatory instinct, would
give up the chase when I disappeared, and, after a pause of
astonishment, would wander away in search of some other prey? I
clambered to the edge of the pit and looked over. The stars were
fading, the sky was whitening, and the cold wind of morning blew
pleasantly upon my face. I could see or hear nothing of my enemy.
Slowly I climbed out and sat for a while upon the ground, ready to
spring back into my refuge if any danger should appear. Then,
reassured by the absolute stillness and by the growing light, I took my
courage in both hands and stole back along the path which I had come.
Some distance down it I picked up my gun, and shortly afterwards struck
the brook which was my guide. So, with many a frightened backward
glance, I made for home.

And suddenly there came something to remind me of my absent companions.
In the clear, still morning air there sounded far away the sharp, hard
note of a single rifle-shot. I paused and listened, but there was
nothing more. For a moment I was shocked at the thought that some
sudden danger might have befallen them. But then a simpler and more
natural explanation came to my mind. It was now broad daylight. No
doubt my absence had been noticed. They had imagined, that I was lost
in the woods, and had fired this shot to guide me home. It is true
that we had made a strict resolution against firing, but if it seemed
to them that I might be in danger they would not hesitate. It was for
me now to hurry on as fast as possible, and so to reassure them.

I was weary and spent, so my progress was not so fast as I wished; but
at last I came into regions which I knew. There was the swamp of the
pterodactyls upon my left; there in front of me was the glade of the
iguanodons. Now I was in the last belt of trees which separated me
from Fort Challenger. I raised my voice in a cheery shout to allay
their fears. No answering greeting came back to me. My heart sank at
that ominous stillness. I quickened my pace into a run. The zareba
rose before me, even as I had left it, but the gate was open. I rushed
in. In the cold, morning light it was a fearful sight which met my
eyes. Our effects were scattered in wild confusion over the ground; my
comrades had disappeared, and close to the smouldering ashes of our
fire the grass was stained crimson with a hideous pool of blood.

I was so stunned by this sudden shock that for a time I must have
nearly lost my reason. I have a vague recollection, as one remembers a
bad dream, of rushing about through the woods all round the empty camp,
calling wildly for my companions. No answer came back from the silent
shadows. The horrible thought that I might never see them again, that
I might find myself abandoned all alone in that dreadful place, with no
possible way of descending into the world below, that I might live and
die in that nightmare country, drove me to desperation. I could have
torn my hair and beaten my head in my despair. Only now did I realize
how I had learned to lean upon my companions, upon the serene
self-confidence of Challenger, and upon the masterful, humorous
coolness of Lord John Roxton. Without them I was like a child in the
dark, helpless and powerless. I did not know which way to turn or what
I should do first.

After a period, during which I sat in bewilderment, I set myself to try
and discover what sudden misfortune could have befallen my companions.
The whole disordered appearance of the camp showed that there had been
some sort of attack, and the rifle-shot no doubt marked the time when
it had occurred. That there should have been only one shot showed that
it had been all over in an instant. The rifles still lay upon the
ground, and one of them--Lord John's--had the empty cartridge in the
breech. The blankets of Challenger and of Summerlee beside the fire
suggested that they had been asleep at the time. The cases of
ammunition and of food were scattered about in a wild litter, together
with our unfortunate cameras and plate-carriers, but none of them were
missing. On the other hand, all the exposed provisions--and I
remembered that there were a considerable quantity of them--were gone.
They were animals, then, and not natives, who had made the inroad, for
surely the latter would have left nothing behind.

But if animals, or some single terrible animal, then what had become of
my comrades? A ferocious beast would surely have destroyed them and
left their remains. It is true that there was that one hideous pool of
blood, which told of violence. Such a monster as had pursued me during
the night could have carried away a victim as easily as a cat would a
mouse. In that case the others would have followed in pursuit. But
then they would assuredly have taken their rifles with them. The more
I tried to think it out with my confused and weary brain the less could
I find any plausible explanation. I searched round in the forest, but
could see no tracks which could help me to a conclusion. Once I lost
myself, and it was only by good luck, and after an hour of wandering,
that I found the camp once more.

Suddenly a thought came to me and brought some little comfort to my
heart. I was not absolutely alone in the world. Down at the bottom of
the cliff, and within call of me, was waiting the faithful Zambo. I
went to the edge of the plateau and looked over. Sure enough, he was
squatting among his blankets beside his fire in his little camp. But,
to my amazement, a second man was seated in front of him. For an
instant my heart leaped for joy, as I thought that one of my comrades
had made his way safely down. But a second glance dispelled the hope.
The rising sun shone red upon the man's skin. He was an Indian. I
shouted loudly and waved my handkerchief. Presently Zambo looked up,
waved his hand, and turned to ascend the pinnacle. In a short time he
was standing close to me and listening with deep distress to the story
which I told him.

"Devil got them for sure, Massa Malone," said he. "You got into the
devil's country, sah, and he take you all to himself. You take advice,
Massa Malone, and come down quick, else he get you as well."

"How can I come down, Zambo?"

"You get creepers from trees, Massa Malone. Throw them over here. I
make fast to this stump, and so you have bridge."

"We have thought of that. There are no creepers here which could bear
us."

"Send for ropes, Massa Malone."

"Who can I send, and where?"

"Send to Indian villages, sah. Plenty hide rope in Indian village.
Indian down below; send him."

"Who is he?

"One of our Indians. Other ones beat him and take away his pay. He
come back to us. Ready now to take letter, bring rope,--anything."

To take a letter! Why not? Perhaps he might bring help; but in any
case he would ensure that our lives were not spent for nothing, and
that news of all that we had won for Science should reach our friends
at home. I had two completed letters already waiting. I would spend
the day in writing a third, which would bring my experiences absolutely
up to date. The Indian could bear this back to the world. I ordered
Zambo, therefore, to come again in the evening, and I spent my
miserable and lonely day in recording my own adventures of the night
before. I also drew up a note, to be given to any white merchant or
captain of a steam-boat whom the Indian could find, imploring them to
see that ropes were sent to us, since our lives must depend upon it.
These documents I threw to Zambo in the evening, and also my purse,
which contained three English sovereigns. These were to be given to
the Indian, and he was promised twice as much if he returned with the
ropes.

So now you will understand, my dear Mr. McArdle, how this communication
reaches you, and you will also know the truth, in case you never hear
again from your unfortunate correspondent. To-night I am too weary and
too depressed to make my plans. To-morrow I must think out some way by
which I shall keep in touch with this camp, and yet search round for
any traces of my unhappy friends.

CHAPTER XIII

"A Sight which I shall Never Forget"

Just as the sun was setting upon that melancholy night I saw the lonely
figure of the Indian upon the vast plain beneath me, and I watched him,
our one faint hope of salvation, until he disappeared in the rising
mists of evening which lay, rose-tinted from the setting sun, between
the far-off river and me.

It was quite dark when I at last turned back to our stricken camp, and
my last vision as I went was the red gleam of Zambo's fire, the one
point of light in the wide world below, as was his faithful presence in
my own shadowed soul. And yet I felt happier than I had done since
this crushing blow had fallen upon me, for it was good to think that
the world should know what we had done, so that at the worst our names
should not perish with our bodies, but should go down to posterity
associated with the result of our labors.

It was an awesome thing to sleep in that ill-fated camp; and yet it was
even more unnerving to do so in the jungle. One or the other it must
be. Prudence, on the one hand, warned me that I should remain on
guard, but exhausted Nature, on the other, declared that I should do
nothing of the kind. I climbed up on to a limb of the great gingko
tree, but there was no secure perch on its rounded surface, and I
should certainly have fallen off and broken my neck the moment I began
to doze. I got down, therefore, and pondered over what I should do.
Finally, I closed the door of the zareba, lit three separate fires in a
triangle, and having eaten a hearty supper dropped off into a profound
sleep, from which I had a strange and most welcome awakening. In the
early morning, just as day was breaking, a hand was laid upon my arm,
and starting up, with all my nerves in a tingle and my hand feeling for
a rifle, I gave a cry of joy as in the cold gray light I saw Lord John
Roxton kneeling beside me.

It was he--and yet it was not he. I had left him calm in his bearing,
correct in his person, prim in his dress. Now he was pale and
wild-eyed, gasping as he breathed like one who has run far and fast.
His gaunt face was scratched and bloody, his clothes were hanging in
rags, and his hat was gone. I stared in amazement, but he gave me no
chance for questions. He was grabbing at our stores all the time he
spoke.

"Quick, young fellah! Quick!" he cried. "Every moment counts. Get
the rifles, both of them. I have the other two. Now, all the
cartridges you can gather. Fill up your pockets. Now, some food.
Half a dozen tins will do. That's all right! Don't wait to talk or
think. Get a move on, or we are done!"

Still half-awake, and unable to imagine what it all might mean, I found
myself hurrying madly after him through the wood, a rifle under each
arm and a pile of various stores in my hands. He dodged in and out
through the thickest of the scrub until he came to a dense clump of
brush-wood. Into this he rushed, regardless of thorns, and threw
himself into the heart of it, pulling me down by his side.

"There!" he panted. "I think we are safe here. They'll make for the
camp as sure as fate. It will be their first idea. But this should
puzzle 'em."

"What is it all?" I asked, when I had got my breath. "Where are the
professors? And who is it that is after us?"

"The ape-men," he cried. "My God, what brutes! Don't raise your
voice, for they have long ears--sharp eyes, too, but no power of scent,
so far as I could judge, so I don't think they can sniff us out. Where
have you been, young fellah? You were well out of it."

In a few sentences I whispered what I had done.

"Pretty bad," said he, when he had heard of the dinosaur and the pit.
"It isn't quite the place for a rest cure. What? But I had no idea
what its possibilities were until those devils got hold of us. The
man-eatin' Papuans had me once, but they are Chesterfields compared to
this crowd."

"How did it happen?" I asked.

"It was in the early mornin'. Our learned friends were just stirrin'.
Hadn't even begun to argue yet. Suddenly it rained apes. They came
down as thick as apples out of a tree. They had been assemblin' in the
dark, I suppose, until that great tree over our heads was heavy with
them. I shot one of them through the belly, but before we knew where
we were they had us spread-eagled on our backs. I call them apes, but
they carried sticks and stones in their hands and jabbered talk to each
other, and ended up by tyin' our hands with creepers, so they are ahead
of any beast that I have seen in my wanderin's. Ape-men--that's what
they are--Missin' Links, and I wish they had stayed missin'. They
carried off their wounded comrade--he was bleedin' like a pig--and then
they sat around us, and if ever I saw frozen murder it was in their
faces. They were big fellows, as big as a man and a deal stronger.
Curious glassy gray eyes they have, under red tufts, and they just sat
and gloated and gloated. Challenger is no chicken, but even he was
cowed. He managed to struggle to his feet, and yelled out at them to
have done with it and get it over. I think he had gone a bit off his
head at the suddenness of it, for he raged and cursed at them like a
lunatic. If they had been a row of his favorite Pressmen he could not
have slanged them worse."

"Well, what did they do?" I was enthralled by the strange story which
my companion was whispering into my ear, while all the time his keen
eyes were shooting in every direction and his hand grasping his cocked
rifle.

"I thought it was the end of us, but instead of that it started them on
a new line. They all jabbered and chattered together. Then one of
them stood out beside Challenger. You'll smile, young fellah, but 'pon
my word they might have been kinsmen. I couldn't have believed it if I
hadn't seen it with my own eyes. This old ape-man--he was their
chief--was a sort of red Challenger, with every one of our friend's
beauty points, only just a trifle more so. He had the short body, the
big shoulders, the round chest, no neck, a great ruddy frill of a
beard, the tufted eyebrows, the 'What do you want, damn you!' look
about the eyes, and the whole catalogue. When the ape-man stood by
Challenger and put his paw on his shoulder, the thing was complete.
Summerlee was a bit hysterical, and he laughed till he cried. The
ape-men laughed too--or at least they put up the devil of a
cacklin'--and they set to work to drag us off through the forest. They
wouldn't touch the guns and things--thought them dangerous, I
expect--but they carried away all our loose food. Summerlee and I got
some rough handlin' on the way--there's my skin and my clothes to prove
it--for they took us a bee-line through the brambles, and their own
hides are like leather. But Challenger was all right. Four of them
carried him shoulder high, and he went like a Roman emperor. What's
that?"

It was a strange clicking noise in the distance not unlike castanets.

"There they go!" said my companion, slipping cartridges into the second
double barrelled "Express." "Load them all up, young fellah my lad,
for we're not going to be taken alive, and don't you think it! That's
the row they make when they are excited. By George! they'll have
something to excite them if they put us up. The 'Last Stand of the
Grays' won't be in it. 'With their rifles grasped in their stiffened
hands, mid a ring of the dead and dyin',' as some fathead sings. Can
you hear them now?"

"Very far away."

"That little lot will do no good, but I expect their search parties are
all over the wood. Well, I was telling you my tale of woe. They got
us soon to this town of theirs--about a thousand huts of branches and
leaves in a great grove of trees near the edge of the cliff. It's
three or four miles from here. The filthy beasts fingered me all over,
and I feel as if I should never be clean again. They tied us up--the
fellow who handled me could tie like a bosun--and there we lay with our
toes up, beneath a tree, while a great brute stood guard over us with a
club in his hand. When I say 'we' I mean Summerlee and myself. Old
Challenger was up a tree, eatin' pines and havin' the time of his life.
I'm bound to say that he managed to get some fruit to us, and with his
own hands he loosened our bonds. If you'd seen him sitting up in that
tree hob-nobbin' with his twin brother--and singin' in that rollin'
bass of his, 'Ring out, wild bells,' cause music of any kind seemed to
put 'em in a good humor, you'd have smiled; but we weren't in much mood
for laughin', as you can guess. They were inclined, within limits, to
let him do what he liked, but they drew the line pretty sharply at us.
It was a mighty consolation to us all to know that you were runnin'
loose and had the archives in your keepin'.

"Well, now, young fellah, I'll tell you what will surprise you. You
say you saw signs of men, and fires, traps, and the like. Well, we
have seen the natives themselves. Poor devils they were, down-faced
little chaps, and had enough to make them so. It seems that the humans
hold one side of this plateau--over yonder, where you saw the
caves--and the ape-men hold this side, and there is bloody war between
them all the time. That's the situation, so far as I could follow it.
Well, yesterday the ape-men got hold of a dozen of the humans and
brought them in as prisoners. You never heard such a jabberin' and
shriekin' in your life. The men were little red fellows, and had been
bitten and clawed so that they could hardly walk. The ape-men put two
of them to death there and then--fairly pulled the arm off one of
them--it was perfectly beastly. Plucky little chaps they are, and
hardly gave a squeak. But it turned us absolutely sick. Summerlee
fainted, and even Challenger had as much as he could stand. I think
they have cleared, don't you?"

We listened intently, but nothing save the calling of the birds broke
the deep peace of the forest. Lord Roxton went on with his story.

"I think you have had the escape of your life, young fellah my lad. It
was catchin' those Indians that put you clean out of their heads, else
they would have been back to the camp for you as sure as fate and
gathered you in. Of course, as you said, they have been watchin' us
from the beginnin' out of that tree, and they knew perfectly well that
we were one short. However, they could think only of this new haul; so
it was I, and not a bunch of apes, that dropped in on you in the
morning. Well, we had a horrid business afterwards. My God! what a
nightmare the whole thing is! You remember the great bristle of sharp
canes down below where we found the skeleton of the American? Well,
that is just under ape-town, and that's the jumpin'-off place of their
prisoners. I expect there's heaps of skeletons there, if we looked for
'em. They have a sort of clear parade-ground on the top, and they make
a proper ceremony about it. One by one the poor devils have to jump,
and the game is to see whether they are merely dashed to pieces or
whether they get skewered on the canes. They took us out to see it,
and the whole tribe lined up on the edge. Four of the Indians jumped,
and the canes went through 'em like knittin' needles through a pat of
butter. No wonder we found that poor Yankee's skeleton with the canes
growin' between his ribs. It was horrible--but it was doocedly
interestin' too. We were all fascinated to see them take the dive,
even when we thought it would be our turn next on the spring-board.

"Well, it wasn't. They kept six of the Indians up for to-day--that's
how I understood it--but I fancy we were to be the star performers in
the show. Challenger might get off, but Summerlee and I were in the
bill. Their language is more than half signs, and it was not hard to
follow them. So I thought it was time we made a break for it. I had
been plottin' it out a bit, and had one or two things clear in my mind.
It was all on me, for Summerlee was useless and Challenger not much
better. The only time they got together they got slangin' because they
couldn't agree upon the scientific classification of these red-headed
devils that had got hold of us. One said it was the dryopithecus of
Java, the other said it was pithecanthropus. Madness, I call
it--Loonies, both. But, as I say, I had thought out one or two points
that were helpful. One was that these brutes could not run as fast as
a man in the open. They have short, bandy legs, you see, and heavy
bodies. Even Challenger could give a few yards in a hundred to the
best of them, and you or I would be a perfect Shrubb. Another point
was that they knew nothin' about guns. I don't believe they ever
understood how the fellow I shot came by his hurt. If we could get at
our guns there was no sayin' what we could do.

"So I broke away early this mornin', gave my guard a kick in the tummy
that laid him out, and sprinted for the camp. There I got you and the
guns, and here we are."

"But the professors!" I cried, in consternation.

"Well, we must just go back and fetch 'em. I couldn't bring 'em with
me. Challenger was up the tree, and Summerlee was not fit for the
effort. The only chance was to get the guns and try a rescue. Of
course they may scupper them at once in revenge. I don't think they
would touch Challenger, but I wouldn't answer for Summerlee. But they
would have had him in any case. Of that I am certain. So I haven't
made matters any worse by boltin'. But we are honor bound to go back
and have them out or see it through with them. So you can make up your
soul, young fellah my lad, for it will be one way or the other before
evenin'."

I have tried to imitate here Lord Roxton's jerky talk, his short,
strong sentences, the half-humorous, half-reckless tone that ran
through it all. But he was a born leader. As danger thickened his
jaunty manner would increase, his speech become more racy, his cold
eyes glitter into ardent life, and his Don Quixote moustache bristle
with joyous excitement. His love of danger, his intense appreciation
of the drama of an adventure--all the more intense for being held
tightly in--his consistent view that every peril in life is a form of
sport, a fierce game betwixt you and Fate, with Death as a forfeit,
made him a wonderful companion at such hours. If it were not for our
fears as to the fate of our companions, it would have been a positive
joy to throw myself with such a man into such an affair. We were
rising from our brushwood hiding-place when suddenly I felt his grip
upon my arm.

"By George!" he whispered, "here they come!"

From where we lay we could look down a brown aisle, arched with green,
formed by the trunks and branches. Along this a party of the ape-men
were passing. They went in single file, with bent legs and rounded
backs, their hands occasionally touching the ground, their heads
turning to left and right as they trotted along. Their crouching gait
took away from their height, but I should put them at five feet or so,
with long arms and enormous chests. Many of them carried sticks, and
at the distance they looked like a line of very hairy and deformed
human beings. For a moment I caught this clear glimpse of them. Then
they were lost among the bushes.

"Not this time," said Lord John, who had caught up his rifle. "Our
best chance is to lie quiet until they have given up the search. Then
we shall see whether we can't get back to their town and hit 'em where
it hurts most. Give 'em an hour and we'll march."

We filled in the time by opening one of our food tins and making sure
of our breakfast. Lord Roxton had had nothing but some fruit since the
morning before and ate like a starving man. Then, at last, our pockets
bulging with cartridges and a rifle in each hand, we started off upon
our mission of rescue. Before leaving it we carefully marked our
little hiding-place among the brush-wood and its bearing to Fort
Challenger, that we might find it again if we needed it. We slunk
through the bushes in silence until we came to the very edge of the
cliff, close to the old camp. There we halted, and Lord John gave me
some idea of his plans.

"So long as we are among the thick trees these swine are our masters,"
said he. "They can see us and we cannot see them. But in the open it
is different. There we can move faster than they. So we must stick to
the open all we can. The edge of the plateau has fewer large trees
than further inland. So that's our line of advance. Go slowly, keep
your eyes open and your rifle ready. Above all, never let them get you
prisoner while there is a cartridge left--that's my last word to you,
young fellah."

When we reached the edge of the cliff I looked over and saw our good
old black Zambo sitting smoking on a rock below us. I would have given
a great deal to have hailed him and told him how we were placed, but it
was too dangerous, lest we should be heard. The woods seemed to be
full of the ape-men; again and again we heard their curious clicking
chatter. At such times we plunged into the nearest clump of bushes and
lay still until the sound had passed away. Our advance, therefore, was
very slow, and two hours at least must have passed before I saw by Lord
John's cautious movements that we must be close to our destination. He
motioned to me to lie still, and he crawled forward himself. In a
minute he was back again, his face quivering with eagerness.

"Come!" said he. "Come quick! I hope to the Lord we are not too late
already!"

I found myself shaking with nervous excitement as I scrambled forward
and lay down beside him, looking out through the bushes at a clearing
which stretched before us.

It was a sight which I shall never forget until my dying day--so weird,
so impossible, that I do not know how I am to make you realize it, or
how in a few years I shall bring myself to believe in it if I live to
sit once more on a lounge in the Savage Club and look out on the drab
solidity of the Embankment. I know that it will seem then to be some
wild nightmare, some delirium of fever. Yet I will set it down now,
while it is still fresh in my memory, and one at least, the man who lay
in the damp grasses by my side, will know if I have lied.

A wide, open space lay before us--some hundreds of yards across--all
green turf and low bracken growing to the very edge of the cliff.
Round this clearing there was a semi-circle of trees with curious huts
built of foliage piled one above the other among the branches. A
rookery, with every nest a little house, would best convey the idea.
The openings of these huts and the branches of the trees were thronged
with a dense mob of ape-people, whom from their size I took to be the
females and infants of the tribe. They formed the background of the
picture, and were all looking out with eager interest at the same scene
which fascinated and bewildered us.

In the open, and near the edge of the cliff, there had assembled a
crowd of some hundred of these shaggy, red-haired creatures, many of
them of immense size, and all of them horrible to look upon. There was
a certain discipline among them, for none of them attempted to break
the line which had been formed. In front there stood a small group of
Indians--little, clean-limbed, red fellows, whose skins glowed like
polished bronze in the strong sunlight. A tall, thin white man was
standing beside them, his head bowed, his arms folded, his whole
attitude expressive of his horror and dejection. There was no
mistaking the angular form of Professor Summerlee.

In front of and around this dejected group of prisoners were several
ape-men, who watched them closely and made all escape impossible.
Then, right out from all the others and close to the edge of the cliff,
were two figures, so strange, and under other circumstances so
ludicrous, that they absorbed my attention. The one was our comrade,
Professor Challenger. The remains of his coat still hung in strips
from his shoulders, but his shirt had been all torn out, and his great
beard merged itself in the black tangle which covered his mighty chest.
He had lost his hat, and his hair, which had grown long in our
wanderings, was flying in wild disorder. A single day seemed to have
changed him from the highest product of modern civilization to the most
desperate savage in South America. Beside him stood his master, the
king of the ape-men. In all things he was, as Lord John had said, the
very image of our Professor, save that his coloring was red instead of
black. The same short, broad figure, the same heavy shoulders, the
same forward hang of the arms, the same bristling beard merging itself
in the hairy chest. Only above the eyebrows, where the sloping
forehead and low, curved skull of the ape-man were in sharp contrast to
the broad brow and magnificent cranium of the European, could one see
any marked difference. At every other point the king was an absurd
parody of the Professor.

All this, which takes me so long to describe, impressed itself upon me
in a few seconds. Then we had very different things to think of, for
an active drama was in progress. Two of the ape-men had seized one of
the Indians out of the group and dragged him forward to the edge of the
cliff. The king raised his hand as a signal. They caught the man by
his leg and arm, and swung him three times backwards and forwards with
tremendous violence. Then, with a frightful heave they shot the poor
wretch over the precipice. With such force did they throw him that he
curved high in the air before beginning to drop. As he vanished from
sight, the whole assembly, except the guards, rushed forward to the
edge of the precipice, and there was a long pause of absolute silence,
broken by a mad yell of delight. They sprang about, tossing their
long, hairy arms in the air and howling with exultation. Then they
fell back from the edge, formed themselves again into line, and waited
for the next victim.

This time it was Summerlee. Two of his guards caught him by the wrists
and pulled him brutally to the front. His thin figure and long limbs
struggled and fluttered like a chicken being dragged from a coop.
Challenger had turned to the king and waved his hands frantically
before him. He was begging, pleading, imploring for his comrade's
life. The ape-man pushed him roughly aside and shook his head. It was
the last conscious movement he was to make upon earth. Lord John's
rifle cracked, and the king sank down, a tangled red sprawling thing,
upon the ground.

"Shoot into the thick of them! Shoot! sonny, shoot!" cried my
companion.

There are strange red depths in the soul of the most commonplace man.
I am tenderhearted by nature, and have found my eyes moist many a time
over the scream of a wounded hare. Yet the blood lust was on me now.
I found myself on my feet emptying one magazine, then the other,
clicking open the breech to re-load, snapping it to again, while
cheering and yelling with pure ferocity and joy of slaughter as I did
so. With our four guns the two of us made a horrible havoc. Both the
guards who held Summerlee were down, and he was staggering about like a
drunken man in his amazement, unable to realize that he was a free man.
The dense mob of ape-men ran about in bewilderment, marveling whence
this storm of death was coming or what it might mean. They waved,
gesticulated, screamed, and tripped up over those who had fallen.
Then, with a sudden impulse, they all rushed in a howling crowd to the
trees for shelter, leaving the ground behind them spotted with their
stricken comrades. The prisoners were left for the moment standing
alone in the middle of the clearing.

Challenger's quick brain had grasped the situation. He seized the
bewildered Summerlee by the arm, and they both ran towards us. Two of
their guards bounded after them and fell to two bullets from Lord John.
We ran forward into the open to meet our friends, and pressed a loaded
rifle into the hands of each. But Summerlee was at the end of his
strength. He could hardly totter. Already the ape-men were recovering
from their panic. They were coming through the brushwood and
threatening to cut us off. Challenger and I ran Summerlee along, one
at each of his elbows, while Lord John covered our retreat, firing
again and again as savage heads snarled at us out of the bushes. For a
mile or more the chattering brutes were at our very heels. Then the
pursuit slackened, for they learned our power and would no longer face
that unerring rifle. When we had at last reached the camp, we looked
back and found ourselves alone.

So it seemed to us; and yet we were mistaken. We had hardly closed the
thornbush door of our zareba, clasped each other's hands, and thrown
ourselves panting upon the ground beside our spring, when we heard a
patter of feet and then a gentle, plaintive crying from outside our
entrance. Lord Roxton rushed forward, rifle in hand, and threw it
open. There, prostrate upon their faces, lay the little red figures of
the four surviving Indians, trembling with fear of us and yet imploring
our protection. With an expressive sweep of his hands one of them
pointed to the woods around them, and indicated that they were full of
danger. Then, darting forward, he threw his arms round Lord John's
legs, and rested his face upon them.

"By George!" cried our peer, pulling at his moustache in great
perplexity, "I say--what the deuce are we to do with these people? Get
up, little chappie, and take your face off my boots."

Summerlee was sitting up and stuffing some tobacco into his old briar.

"We've got to see them safe," said he. "You've pulled us all out of
the jaws of death. My word! it was a good bit of work!"

"Admirable!" cried Challenger. "Admirable! Not only we as
individuals, but European science collectively, owe you a deep debt of
gratitude for what you have done. I do not hesitate to say that the
disappearance of Professor Summerlee and myself would have left an
appreciable gap in modern zoological history. Our young friend here
and you have done most excellently well."

He beamed at us with the old paternal smile, but European science would
have been somewhat amazed could they have seen their chosen child, the
hope of the future, with his tangled, unkempt head, his bare chest, and
his tattered clothes. He had one of the meat-tins between his knees,
and sat with a large piece of cold Australian mutton between his
fingers. The Indian looked up at him, and then, with a little yelp,
cringed to the ground and clung to Lord John's leg.

"Don't you be scared, my bonnie boy," said Lord John, patting the
matted head in front of him. "He can't stick your appearance,
Challenger; and, by George! I don't wonder. All right, little chap,
he's only a human, just the same as the rest of us."

"Really, sir!" cried the Professor.

"Well, it's lucky for you, Challenger, that you ARE a little out of the
ordinary. If you hadn't been so like the king----"

"Upon my word, Lord John, you allow yourself great latitude."

"Well, it's a fact."

"I beg, sir, that you will change the subject. Your remarks are
irrelevant and unintelligible. The question before us is what are we
to do with these Indians? The obvious thing is to escort them home, if
we knew where their home was."

"There is no difficulty about that," said I. "They live in the caves
on the other side of the central lake."

"Our young friend here knows where they live. I gather that it is some
distance."

"A good twenty miles," said I.

Summerlee gave a groan.

"I, for one, could never get there. Surely I hear those brutes still
howling upon our track."

As he spoke, from the dark recesses of the woods we heard far away the
jabbering cry of the ape-men. The Indians once more set up a feeble
wail of fear.

"We must move, and move quick!" said Lord John. "You help Summerlee,
young fellah. These Indians will carry stores. Now, then, come along
before they can see us."

In less than half-an-hour we had reached our brushwood retreat and
concealed ourselves. All day we heard the excited calling of the
ape-men in the direction of our old camp, but none of them came our
way, and the tired fugitives, red and white, had a long, deep sleep. I
was dozing myself in the evening when someone plucked my sleeve, and I
found Challenger kneeling beside me.

"You keep a diary of these events, and you expect eventually to publish
it, Mr. Malone," said he, with solemnity.

"I am only here as a Press reporter," I answered.

"Exactly. You may have heard some rather fatuous remarks of Lord John
Roxton's which seemed to imply that there was some--some
resemblance----"

"Yes, I heard them."

"I need not say that any publicity given to such an idea--any levity in
your narrative of what occurred--would be exceedingly offensive to me."

"I will keep well within the truth."

"Lord John's observations are frequently exceedingly fanciful, and he
is capable of attributing the most absurd reasons to the respect which
is always shown by the most undeveloped races to dignity and character.
You follow my meaning?"

"Entirely."

"I leave the matter to your discretion." Then, after a long pause, he
added: "The king of the ape-men was really a creature of great
distinction--a most remarkably handsome and intelligent personality.
Did it not strike you?"

"A most remarkable creature," said I.

And the Professor, much eased in his mind, settled down to his slumber
once more.

CHAPTER XIV

"Those Were the Real Conquests"

We had imagined that our pursuers, the ape-men, knew nothing of our
brush-wood hiding-place, but we were soon to find out our mistake.
There was no sound in the woods--not a leaf moved upon the trees, and
all was peace around us--but we should have been warned by our first
experience how cunningly and how patiently these creatures can watch
and wait until their chance comes. Whatever fate may be mine through
life, I am very sure that I shall never be nearer death than I was that
morning. But I will tell you the thing in its due order.

We all awoke exhausted after the terrific emotions and scanty food of
yesterday. Summerlee was still so weak that it was an effort for him
to stand; but the old man was full of a sort of surly courage which
would never admit defeat. A council was held, and it was agreed that
we should wait quietly for an hour or two where we were, have our
much-needed breakfast, and then make our way across the plateau and
round the central lake to the caves where my observations had shown
that the Indians lived. We relied upon the fact that we could count
upon the good word of those whom we had rescued to ensure a warm
welcome from their fellows. Then, with our mission accomplished and
possessing a fuller knowledge of the secrets of Maple White Land, we
should turn our whole thoughts to the vital problem of our escape and
return. Even Challenger was ready to admit that we should then have
done all for which we had come, and that our first duty from that time
onwards was to carry back to civilization the amazing discoveries we
had made.

We were able now to take a more leisurely view of the Indians whom we
had rescued. They were small men, wiry, active, and well-built, with
lank black hair tied up in a bunch behind their heads with a leathern
thong, and leathern also were their loin-clothes. Their faces were
hairless, well formed, and good-humored. The lobes of their ears,
hanging ragged and bloody, showed that they had been pierced for some
ornaments which their captors had torn out. Their speech, though
unintelligible to us, was fluent among themselves, and as they pointed
to each other and uttered the word "Accala" many times over, we
gathered that this was the name of the nation. Occasionally, with
faces which were convulsed with fear and hatred, they shook their
clenched hands at the woods round and cried: "Doda! Doda!" which was
surely their term for their enemies.

"What do you make of them, Challenger?" asked Lord John. "One thing is
very clear to me, and that is that the little chap with the front of
his head shaved is a chief among them."

It was indeed evident that this man stood apart from the others, and
that they never ventured to address him without every sign of deep
respect. He seemed to be the youngest of them all, and yet, so proud
and high was his spirit that, upon Challenger laying his great hand
upon his head, he started like a spurred horse and, with a quick flash
of his dark eyes, moved further away from the Professor. Then, placing
his hand upon his breast and holding himself with great dignity, he
uttered the word "Maretas" several times. The Professor, unabashed,
seized the nearest Indian by the shoulder and proceeded to lecture upon
him as if he were a potted specimen in a class-room.

"The type of these people," said he in his sonorous fashion, "whether
judged by cranial capacity, facial angle, or any other test, cannot be
regarded as a low one; on the contrary, we must place it as
considerably higher in the scale than many South American tribes which
I can mention. On no possible supposition can we explain the evolution
of such a race in this place. For that matter, so great a gap
separates these ape-men from the primitive animals which have survived
upon this plateau, that it is inadmissible to think that they could
have developed where we find them."

"Then where the dooce did they drop from?" asked Lord John.

"A question which will, no doubt, be eagerly discussed in every
scientific society in Europe and America," the Professor answered. "My
own reading of the situation for what it is worth--" he inflated his
chest enormously and looked insolently around him at the words--"is
that evolution has advanced under the peculiar conditions of this
country up to the vertebrate stage, the old types surviving and living
on in company with the newer ones. Thus we find such modern creatures
as the tapir--an animal with quite a respectable length of
pedigree--the great deer, and the ant-eater in the companionship of
reptilian forms of jurassic type. So much is clear. And now come the
ape-men and the Indian. What is the scientific mind to think of their
presence? I can only account for it by an invasion from outside. It
is probable that there existed an anthropoid ape in South America, who
in past ages found his way to this place, and that he developed into
the creatures we have seen, some of which"--here he looked hard at
me--"were of an appearance and shape which, if it had been accompanied
by corresponding intelligence, would, I do not hesitate to say, have
reflected credit upon any living race. As to the Indians I cannot
doubt that they are more recent immigrants from below. Under the
stress of famine or of conquest they have made their way up here.
Faced by ferocious creatures which they had never before seen, they
took refuge in the caves which our young friend has described, but they
have no doubt had a bitter fight to hold their own against wild beasts,
and especially against the ape-men who would regard them as intruders,
and wage a merciless war upon them with a cunning which the larger
beasts would lack. Hence the fact that their numbers appear to be
limited. Well, gentlemen, have I read you the riddle aright, or is
there any point which you would query?"

Professor Summerlee for once was too depressed to argue, though he
shook his head violently as a token of general disagreement. Lord John
merely scratched his scanty locks with the remark that he couldn't put
up a fight as he wasn't in the same weight or class. For my own part I
performed my usual role of bringing things down to a strictly prosaic
and practical level by the remark that one of the Indians was missing.

"He has gone to fetch some water," said Lord Roxton. "We fitted him up
with an empty beef tin and he is off."

"To the old camp?" I asked.

"No, to the brook. It's among the trees there. It can't be more than
a couple of hundred yards. But the beggar is certainly taking his
time."

"I'll go and look after him," said I. I picked up my rifle and
strolled in the direction of the brook, leaving my friends to lay out
the scanty breakfast. It may seem to you rash that even for so short a
distance I should quit the shelter of our friendly thicket, but you
will remember that we were many miles from Ape-town, that so far as we
knew the creatures had not discovered our retreat, and that in any case
with a rifle in my hands I had no fear of them. I had not yet learned
their cunning or their strength.

I could hear the murmur of our brook somewhere ahead of me, but there
was a tangle of trees and brushwood between me and it. I was making my
way through this at a point which was just out of sight of my
companions, when, under one of the trees, I noticed something red
huddled among the bushes. As I approached it, I was shocked to see
that it was the dead body of the missing Indian. He lay upon his side,
his limbs drawn up, and his head screwed round at a most unnatural
angle, so that he seemed to be looking straight over his own shoulder.
I gave a cry to warn my friends that something was amiss, and running
forwards I stooped over the body. Surely my guardian angel was very
near me then, for some instinct of fear, or it may have been some faint
rustle of leaves, made me glance upwards. Out of the thick green
foliage which hung low over my head, two long muscular arms covered
with reddish hair were slowly descending. Another instant and the
great stealthy hands would have been round my throat. I sprang
backwards, but quick as I was, those hands were quicker still. Through
my sudden spring they missed a fatal grip, but one of them caught the
back of my neck and the other one my face. I threw my hands up to
protect my throat, and the next moment the huge paw had slid down my
face and closed over them. I was lifted lightly from the ground, and I
felt an intolerable pressure forcing my head back and back until the
strain upon the cervical spine was more than I could bear. My senses
swam, but I still tore at the hand and forced it out from my chin.
Looking up I saw a frightful face with cold inexorable light blue eyes
looking down into mine. There was something hypnotic in those terrible
eyes. I could struggle no longer. As the creature felt me grow limp
in his grasp, two white canines gleamed for a moment at each side of
the vile mouth, and the grip tightened still more upon my chin, forcing
it always upwards and back. A thin, oval-tinted mist formed before my
eyes and little silvery bells tinkled in my ears. Dully and far off I
heard the crack of a rifle and was feebly aware of the shock as I was
dropped to the earth, where I lay without sense or motion.

I awoke to find myself on my back upon the grass in our lair within the
thicket. Someone had brought the water from the brook, and Lord John
was sprinkling my head with it, while Challenger and Summerlee were
propping me up, with concern in their faces. For a moment I had a
glimpse of the human spirits behind their scientific masks. It was
really shock, rather than any injury, which had prostrated me, and in
half-an-hour, in spite of aching head and stiff neck, I was sitting up
and ready for anything.

"But you've had the escape of your life, young fellah my lad," said
Lord Roxton. "When I heard your cry and ran forward, and saw your head
twisted half-off and your stohwassers kickin' in the air, I thought we
were one short. I missed the beast in my flurry, but he dropped you
all right and was off like a streak. By George! I wish I had fifty
men with rifles. I'd clear out the whole infernal gang of them and
leave this country a bit cleaner than we found it."

It was clear now that the ape-men had in some way marked us down, and
that we were watched on every side. We had not so much to fear from
them during the day, but they would be very likely to rush us by night;
so the sooner we got away from their neighborhood the better. On three
sides of us was absolute forest, and there we might find ourselves in
an ambush. But on the fourth side--that which sloped down in the
direction of the lake--there was only low scrub, with scattered trees
and occasional open glades. It was, in fact, the route which I had
myself taken in my solitary journey, and it led us straight for the
Indian caves. This then must for every reason be our road.

One great regret we had, and that was to leave our old camp behind us,
not only for the sake of the stores which remained there, but even more
because we were losing touch with Zambo, our link with the outside
world. However, we had a fair supply of cartridges and all our guns,
so, for a time at least, we could look after ourselves, and we hoped
soon to have a chance of returning and restoring our communications
with our negro. He had faithfully promised to stay where he was, and
we had not a doubt that he would be as good as his word.

It was in the early afternoon that we started upon our journey. The
young chief walked at our head as our guide, but refused indignantly to
carry any burden. Behind him came the two surviving Indians with our
scanty possessions upon their backs. We four white men walked in the
rear with rifles loaded and ready. As we started there broke from the
thick silent woods behind us a sudden great ululation of the ape-men,
which may have been a cheer of triumph at our departure or a jeer of
contempt at our flight. Looking back we saw only the dense screen of
trees, but that long-drawn yell told us how many of our enemies lurked
among them. We saw no sign of pursuit, however, and soon we had got
into more open country and beyond their power.

As I tramped along, the rearmost of the four, I could not help smiling
at the appearance of my three companions in front. Was this the
luxurious Lord John Roxton who had sat that evening in the Albany
amidst his Persian rugs and his pictures in the pink radiance of the
tinted lights? And was this the imposing Professor who had swelled
behind the great desk in his massive study at Enmore Park? And,
finally, could this be the austere and prim figure which had risen
before the meeting at the Zoological Institute? No three tramps that
one could have met in a Surrey lane could have looked more hopeless and
bedraggled. We had, it is true, been only a week or so upon the top of
the plateau, but all our spare clothing was in our camp below, and the
one week had been a severe one upon us all, though least to me who had
not to endure the handling of the ape-men. My three friends had all
lost their hats, and had now bound handkerchiefs round their heads,
their clothes hung in ribbons about them, and their unshaven grimy
faces were hardly to be recognized. Both Summerlee and Challenger were
limping heavily, while I still dragged my feet from weakness after the
shock of the morning, and my neck was as stiff as a board from the
murderous grip that held it. We were indeed a sorry crew, and I did
not wonder to see our Indian companions glance back at us occasionally
with horror and amazement on their faces.

In the late afternoon we reached the margin of the lake, and as we
emerged from the bush and saw the sheet of water stretching before us
our native friends set up a shrill cry of joy and pointed eagerly in
front of them. It was indeed a wonderful sight which lay before us.
Sweeping over the glassy surface was a great flotilla of canoes coming
straight for the shore upon which we stood. They were some miles out
when we first saw them, but they shot forward with great swiftness, and
were soon so near that the rowers could distinguish our persons.
Instantly a thunderous shout of delight burst from them, and we saw
them rise from their seats, waving their paddles and spears madly in
the air. Then bending to their work once more, they flew across the
intervening water, beached their boats upon the sloping sand, and
rushed up to us, prostrating themselves with loud cries of greeting
before the young chief. Finally one of them, an elderly man, with a
necklace and bracelet of great lustrous glass beads and the skin of
some beautiful mottled amber-colored animal slung over his shoulders,
ran forward and embraced most tenderly the youth whom we had saved. He
then looked at us and asked some questions, after which he stepped up
with much dignity and embraced us also each in turn. Then, at his
order, the whole tribe lay down upon the ground before us in homage.
Personally I felt shy and uncomfortable at this obsequious adoration,
and I read the same feeling in the faces of Roxton and Summerlee, but
Challenger expanded like a flower in the sun.

"They may be undeveloped types," said he, stroking his beard and
looking round at them, "but their deportment in the presence of their
superiors might be a lesson to some of our more advanced Europeans.
Strange how correct are the instincts of the natural man!"

It was clear that the natives had come out upon the war-path, for every
man carried his spear--a long bamboo tipped with bone--his bow and
arrows, and some sort of club or stone battle-axe slung at his side.
Their dark, angry glances at the woods from which we had come, and the
frequent repetition of the word "Doda," made it clear enough that this
was a rescue party who had set forth to save or revenge the old chief's
son, for such we gathered that the youth must be. A council was now
held by the whole tribe squatting in a circle, whilst we sat near on a
slab of basalt and watched their proceedings. Two or three warriors
spoke, and finally our young friend made a spirited harangue with such
eloquent features and gestures that we could understand it all as
clearly as if we had known his language.

"What is the use of returning?" he said. "Sooner or later the thing
must be done. Your comrades have been murdered. What if I have
returned safe? These others have been done to death. There is no
safety for any of us. We are assembled now and ready." Then he pointed
to us. "These strange men are our friends. They are great fighters,
and they hate the ape-men even as we do. They command," here he
pointed up to heaven, "the thunder and the lightning. When shall we
have such a chance again? Let us go forward, and either die now or
live for the future in safety. How else shall we go back unashamed to
our women?"

The little red warriors hung upon the words of the speaker, and when he
had finished they burst into a roar of applause, waving their rude
weapons in the air. The old chief stepped forward to us, and asked us
some questions, pointing at the same time to the woods. Lord John made
a sign to him that he should wait for an answer and then he turned to
us.

"Well, it's up to you to say what you will do," said he; "for my part I
have a score to settle with these monkey-folk, and if it ends by wiping
them off the face of the earth I don't see that the earth need fret
about it. I'm goin' with our little red pals and I mean to see them
through the scrap. What do you say, young fellah?"

"Of course I will come."

"And you, Challenger?"

"I will assuredly co-operate."

"And you, Summerlee?"

"We seem to be drifting very far from the object of this expedition,
Lord John. I assure you that I little thought when I left my
professional chair in London that it was for the purpose of heading a
raid of savages upon a colony of anthropoid apes."

"To such base uses do we come," said Lord John, smiling. "But we are
up against it, so what's the decision?"

"It seems a most questionable step," said Summerlee, argumentative to
the last, "but if you are all going, I hardly see how I can remain
behind."

"Then it is settled," said Lord John, and turning to the chief he
nodded and slapped his rifle.

The old fellow clasped our hands, each in turn, while his men cheered
louder than ever. It was too late to advance that night, so the
Indians settled down into a rude bivouac. On all sides their fires
began to glimmer and smoke. Some of them who had disappeared into the
jungle came back presently driving a young iguanodon before them. Like
the others, it had a daub of asphalt upon its shoulder, and it was only
when we saw one of the natives step forward with the air of an owner
and give his consent to the beast's slaughter that we understood at
last that these great creatures were as much private property as a herd
of cattle, and that these symbols which had so perplexed us were
nothing more than the marks of the owner. Helpless, torpid, and
vegetarian, with great limbs but a minute brain, they could be rounded
up and driven by a child. In a few minutes the huge beast had been cut
up and slabs of him were hanging over a dozen camp fires, together with
great scaly ganoid fish which had been speared in the lake.

Summerlee had lain down and slept upon the sand, but we others roamed
round the edge of the water, seeking to learn something more of this
strange country. Twice we found pits of blue clay, such as we had
already seen in the swamp of the pterodactyls. These were old volcanic
vents, and for some reason excited the greatest interest in Lord John.
What attracted Challenger, on the other hand, was a bubbling, gurgling
mud geyser, where some strange gas formed great bursting bubbles upon
the surface. He thrust a hollow reed into it and cried out with
delight like a schoolboy then he was able, on touching it with a
lighted match, to cause a sharp explosion and a blue flame at the far
end of the tube. Still more pleased was he when, inverting a leathern
pouch over the end of the reed, and so filling it with the gas, he was
able to send it soaring up into the air.

"An inflammable gas, and one markedly lighter than the atmosphere. I
should say beyond doubt that it contained a considerable proportion of
free hydrogen. The resources of G. E. C. are not yet exhausted, my
young friend. I may yet show you how a great mind molds all Nature to
its use." He swelled with some secret purpose, but would say no more.

There was nothing which we could see upon the shore which seemed to me
so wonderful as the great sheet of water before us. Our numbers and
our noise had frightened all living creatures away, and save for a few
pterodactyls, which soared round high above our heads while they waited
for the carrion, all was still around the camp. But it was different
out upon the rose-tinted waters of the central lake. It boiled and
heaved with strange life. Great slate-colored backs and high serrated
dorsal fins shot up with a fringe of silver, and then rolled down into
the depths again. The sand-banks far out were spotted with uncouth
crawling forms, huge turtles, strange saurians, and one great flat
creature like a writhing, palpitating mat of black greasy leather,
which flopped its way slowly to the lake. Here and there high serpent
heads projected out of the water, cutting swiftly through it with a
little collar of foam in front, and a long swirling wake behind, rising
and falling in graceful, swan-like undulations as they went. It was
not until one of these creatures wriggled on to a sand-bank within a
few hundred yards of us, and exposed a barrel-shaped body and huge
flippers behind the long serpent neck, that Challenger, and Summerlee,
who had joined us, broke out into their duet of wonder and admiration.

"Plesiosaurus! A fresh-water plesiosaurus!" cried Summerlee. "That I
should have lived to see such a sight! We are blessed, my dear
Challenger, above all zoologists since the world began!"

It was not until the night had fallen, and the fires of our savage
allies glowed red in the shadows, that our two men of science could be
dragged away from the fascinations of that primeval lake. Even in the
darkness as we lay upon the strand, we heard from time to time the
snort and plunge of the huge creatures who lived therein.

At earliest dawn our camp was astir and an hour later we had started
upon our memorable expedition. Often in my dreams have I thought that
I might live to be a war correspondent. In what wildest one could I
have conceived the nature of the campaign which it should be my lot to
report! Here then is my first despatch from a field of battle:

Our numbers had been reinforced during the night by a fresh batch of
natives from the caves, and we may have been four or five hundred
strong when we made our advance. A fringe of scouts was thrown out in
front, and behind them the whole force in a solid column made their way
up the long slope of the bush country until we were near the edge of
the forest. Here they spread out into a long straggling line of
spearmen and bowmen. Roxton and Summerlee took their position upon the
right flank, while Challenger and I were on the left. It was a host of
the stone age that we were accompanying to battle--we with the last
word of the gunsmith's art from St. James' Street and the Strand.

We had not long to wait for our enemy. A wild shrill clamor rose from
the edge of the wood and suddenly a body of ape-men rushed out with
clubs and stones, and made for the center of the Indian line. It was a
valiant move but a foolish one, for the great bandy-legged creatures
were slow of foot, while their opponents were as active as cats. It
was horrible to see the fierce brutes with foaming mouths and glaring
eyes, rushing and grasping, but forever missing their elusive enemies,
while arrow after arrow buried itself in their hides. One great fellow
ran past me roaring with pain, with a dozen darts sticking from his
chest and ribs. In mercy I put a bullet through his skull, and he fell
sprawling among the aloes. But this was the only shot fired, for the
attack had been on the center of the line, and the Indians there had
needed no help of ours in repulsing it. Of all the ape-men who had
rushed out into the open, I do not think that one got back to cover.

But the matter was more deadly when we came among the trees. For an
hour or more after we entered the wood, there was a desperate struggle
in which for a time we hardly held our own. Springing out from among
the scrub the ape-men with huge clubs broke in upon the Indians and
often felled three or four of them before they could be speared. Their
frightful blows shattered everything upon which they fell. One of them
knocked Summerlee's rifle to matchwood and the next would have crushed
his skull had an Indian not stabbed the beast to the heart. Other
ape-men in the trees above us hurled down stones and logs of wood,
occasionally dropping bodily on to our ranks and fighting furiously
until they were felled. Once our allies broke under the pressure, and
had it not been for the execution done by our rifles they would
certainly have taken to their heels. But they were gallantly rallied
by their old chief and came on with such a rush that the ape-men began
in turn to give way. Summerlee was weaponless, but I was emptying my
magazine as quick as I could fire, and on the further flank we heard
the continuous cracking of our companion's rifles.

Then in a moment came the panic and the collapse. Screaming and
howling, the great creatures rushed away in all directions through the
brushwood, while our allies yelled in their savage delight, following
swiftly after their flying enemies. All the feuds of countless
generations, all the hatreds and cruelties of their narrow history, all
the memories of ill-usage and persecution were to be purged that day.
At last man was to be supreme and the man-beast to find forever his
allotted place. Fly as they would the fugitives were too slow to
escape from the active savages, and from every side in the tangled
woods we heard the exultant yells, the twanging of bows, and the crash
and thud as ape-men were brought down from their hiding-places in the
trees.

I was following the others, when I found that Lord John and Challenger
had come across to join us.

"It's over," said Lord John. "I think we can leave the tidying up to
them. Perhaps the less we see of it the better we shall sleep."

Challenger's eyes were shining with the lust of slaughter.

"We have been privileged," he cried, strutting about like a gamecock,
"to be present at one of the typical decisive battles of history--the
battles which have determined the fate of the world. What, my friends,
is the conquest of one nation by another? It is meaningless. Each
produces the same result. But those fierce fights, when in the dawn of
the ages the cave-dwellers held their own against the tiger folk, or
the elephants first found that they had a master, those were the real
conquests--the victories that count. By this strange turn of fate we
have seen and helped to decide even such a contest. Now upon this
plateau the future must ever be for man."

It needed a robust faith in the end to justify such tragic means. As
we advanced together through the woods we found the ape-men lying
thick, transfixed with spears or arrows. Here and there a little group
of shattered Indians marked where one of the anthropoids had turned to
bay, and sold his life dearly. Always in front of us we heard the
yelling and roaring which showed the direction of the pursuit. The
ape-men had been driven back to their city, they had made a last stand
there, once again they had been broken, and now we were in time to see
the final fearful scene of all. Some eighty or a hundred males, the
last survivors, had been driven across that same little clearing which
led to the edge of the cliff, the scene of our own exploit two days
before. As we arrived the Indians, a semicircle of spearmen, had
closed in on them, and in a minute it was over, Thirty or forty died
where they stood. The others, screaming and clawing, were thrust over
the precipice, and went hurtling down, as their prisoners had of old,
on to the sharp bamboos six hundred feet below. It was as Challenger
had said, and the reign of man was assured forever in Maple White Land.
The males were exterminated, Ape Town was destroyed, the females and
young were driven away to live in bondage, and the long rivalry of
untold centuries had reached its bloody end.

For us the victory brought much advantage. Once again we were able to
visit our camp and get at our stores. Once more also we were able to
communicate with Zambo, who had been terrified by the spectacle from
afar of an avalanche of apes falling from the edge of the cliff.

"Come away, Massas, come away!" he cried, his eyes starting from his
head. "The debbil get you sure if you stay up there."

"It is the voice of sanity!" said Summerlee with conviction. "We have
had adventures enough and they are neither suitable to our character or
our position. I hold you to your word, Challenger. From now onwards
you devote your energies to getting us out of this horrible country and
back once more to civilization."

CHAPTER XV

"Our Eyes have seen Great Wonders"

I write this from day to day, but I trust that before I come to the end
of it, I may be able to say that the light shines, at last, through our
clouds. We are held here with no clear means of making our escape, and
bitterly we chafe against it. Yet, I can well imagine that the day may
come when we may be glad that we were kept, against our will, to see
something more of the wonders of this singular place, and of the
creatures who inhabit it.

The victory of the Indians and the annihilation of the ape-men, marked
the turning point of our fortunes. From then onwards, we were in truth
masters of the plateau, for the natives looked upon us with a mixture
of fear and gratitude, since by our strange powers we had aided them to
destroy their hereditary foe. For their own sakes they would, perhaps,
be glad to see the departure of such formidable and incalculable
people, but they have not themselves suggested any way by which we may
reach the plains below. There had been, so far as we could follow
their signs, a tunnel by which the place could be approached, the lower
exit of which we had seen from below. By this, no doubt, both ape-men
and Indians had at different epochs reached the top, and Maple White
with his companion had taken the same way. Only the year before,
however, there had been a terrific earthquake, and the upper end of the
tunnel had fallen in and completely disappeared. The Indians now could
only shake their heads and shrug their shoulders when we expressed by
signs our desire to descend. It may be that they cannot, but it may
also be that they will not, help us to get away.

At the end of the victorious campaign the surviving ape-folk were
driven across the plateau (their wailings were horrible) and
established in the neighborhood of the Indian caves, where they would,
from now onwards, be a servile race under the eyes of their masters.
It was a rude, raw, primeval version of the Jews in Babylon or the
Israelites in Egypt. At night we could hear from amid the trees the
long-drawn cry, as some primitive Ezekiel mourned for fallen greatness
and recalled the departed glories of Ape Town. Hewers of wood and
drawers of water, such were they from now onwards.

We had returned across the plateau with our allies two days after the
battle, and made our camp at the foot of their cliffs. They would have
had us share their caves with them, but Lord John would by no means
consent to it considering that to do so would put us in their power if
they were treacherously disposed. We kept our independence, therefore,
and had our weapons ready for any emergency, while preserving the most
friendly relations. We also continually visited their caves, which
were most remarkable places, though whether made by man or by Nature we
have never been able to determine. They were all on the one stratum,
hollowed out of some soft rock which lay between the volcanic basalt
forming the ruddy cliffs above them, and the hard granite which formed
their base.

The openings were about eighty feet above the ground, and were led up
to by long stone stairs, so narrow and steep that no large animal could
mount them. Inside they were warm and dry, running in straight
passages of varying length into the side of the hill, with smooth gray
walls decorated with many excellent pictures done with charred sticks
and representing the various animals of the plateau. If every living
thing were swept from the country the future explorer would find upon
the walls of these caves ample evidence of the strange fauna--the
dinosaurs, iguanodons, and fish lizards--which had lived so recently
upon earth.

Since we had learned that the huge iguanodons were kept as tame herds
by their owners, and were simply walking meat-stores, we had conceived
that man, even with his primitive weapons, had established his
ascendancy upon the plateau. We were soon to discover that it was not
so, and that he was still there upon tolerance.

It was on the third day after our forming our camp near the Indian
caves that the tragedy occurred. Challenger and Summerlee had gone off
together that day to the lake where some of the natives, under their
direction, were engaged in harpooning specimens of the great lizards.
Lord John and I had remained in our camp, while a number of the Indians
were scattered about upon the grassy slope in front of the caves
engaged in different ways. Suddenly there was a shrill cry of alarm,
with the word "Stoa" resounding from a hundred tongues. From every
side men, women, and children were rushing wildly for shelter, swarming
up the staircases and into the caves in a mad stampede.

Looking up, we could see them waving their arms from the rocks above
and beckoning to us to join them in their refuge. We had both seized
our magazine rifles and ran out to see what the danger could be.
Suddenly from the near belt of trees there broke forth a group of
twelve or fifteen Indians, running for their lives, and at their very
heels two of those frightful monsters which had disturbed our camp and
pursued me upon my solitary journey. In shape they were like horrible
toads, and moved in a succession of springs, but in size they were of
an incredible bulk, larger than the largest elephant. We had never
before seen them save at night, and indeed they are nocturnal animals
save when disturbed in their lairs, as these had been. We now stood
amazed at the sight, for their blotched and warty skins were of a
curious fish-like iridescence, and the sunlight struck them with an
ever-varying rainbow bloom as they moved.

We had little time to watch them, however, for in an instant they had
overtaken the fugitives and were making a dire slaughter among them.
Their method was to fall forward with their full weight upon each in
turn, leaving him crushed and mangled, to bound on after the others.
The wretched Indians screamed with terror, but were helpless, run as
they would, before the relentless purpose and horrible activity of
these monstrous creatures. One after another they went down, and there
were not half-a-dozen surviving by the time my companion and I could
come to their help. But our aid was of little avail and only involved
us in the same peril. At the range of a couple of hundred yards we
emptied our magazines, firing bullet after bullet into the beasts, but
with no more effect than if we were pelting them with pellets of paper.
Their slow reptilian natures cared nothing for wounds, and the springs
of their lives, with no special brain center but scattered throughout
their spinal cords, could not be tapped by any modern weapons. The
most that we could do was to check their progress by distracting their
attention with the flash and roar of our guns, and so to give both the
natives and ourselves time to reach the steps which led to safety. But
where the conical explosive bullets of the twentieth century were of no
avail, the poisoned arrows of the natives, dipped in the juice of
strophanthus and steeped afterwards in decayed carrion, could succeed.
Such arrows were of little avail to the hunter who attacked the beast,
because their action in that torpid circulation was slow, and before
its powers failed it could certainly overtake and slay its assailant.
But now, as the two monsters hounded us to the very foot of the stairs,
a drift of darts came whistling from every chink in the cliff above
them. In a minute they were feathered with them, and yet with no sign
of pain they clawed and slobbered with impotent rage at the steps which
would lead them to their victims, mounting clumsily up for a few yards
and then sliding down again to the ground. But at last the poison
worked. One of them gave a deep rumbling groan and dropped his huge
squat head on to the earth. The other bounded round in an eccentric
circle with shrill, wailing cries, and then lying down writhed in agony
for some minutes before it also stiffened and lay still. With yells of
triumph the Indians came flocking down from their caves and danced a
frenzied dance of victory round the dead bodies, in mad joy that two
more of the most dangerous of all their enemies had been slain. That
night they cut up and removed the bodies, not to eat--for the poison
was still active--but lest they should breed a pestilence. The great
reptilian hearts, however, each as large as a cushion, still lay there,
beating slowly and steadily, with a gentle rise and fall, in horrible
independent life. It was only upon the third day that the ganglia ran
down and the dreadful things were still.

Some day, when I have a better desk than a meat-tin and more helpful
tools than a worn stub of pencil and a last, tattered note-book, I will
write some fuller account of the Accala Indians--of our life amongst
them, and of the glimpses which we had of the strange conditions of
wondrous Maple White Land. Memory, at least, will never fail me, for
so long as the breath of life is in me, every hour and every action of
that period will stand out as hard and clear as do the first strange
happenings of our childhood. No new impressions could efface those
which are so deeply cut. When the time comes I will describe that
wondrous moonlit night upon the great lake when a young
ichthyosaurus--a strange creature, half seal, half fish, to look at,
with bone-covered eyes on each side of his snout, and a third eye fixed
upon the top of his head--was entangled in an Indian net, and nearly
upset our canoe before we towed it ashore; the same night that a green
water-snake shot out from the rushes and carried off in its coils the
steersman of Challenger's canoe. I will tell, too, of the great
nocturnal white thing--to this day we do not know whether it was beast
or reptile--which lived in a vile swamp to the east of the lake, and
flitted about with a faint phosphorescent glimmer in the darkness. The
Indians were so terrified at it that they would not go near the place,
and, though we twice made expeditions and saw it each time, we could
not make our way through the deep marsh in which it lived. I can only
say that it seemed to be larger than a cow and had the strangest musky
odor. I will tell also of the huge bird which chased Challenger to the
shelter of the rocks one day--a great running bird, far taller than an
ostrich, with a vulture-like neck and cruel head which made it a
walking death. As Challenger climbed to safety one dart of that savage
curving beak shore off the heel of his boot as if it had been cut with
a chisel. This time at least modern weapons prevailed and the great
creature, twelve feet from head to foot--phororachus its name,
according to our panting but exultant Professor--went down before Lord
Roxton's rifle in a flurry of waving feathers and kicking limbs, with
two remorseless yellow eyes glaring up from the midst of it. May I
live to see that flattened vicious skull in its own niche amid the
trophies of the Albany. Finally, I will assuredly give some account of
the toxodon, the giant ten-foot guinea pig, with projecting chisel
teeth, which we killed as it drank in the gray of the morning by the
side of the lake.

All this I shall some day write at fuller length, and amidst these more
stirring days I would tenderly sketch in these lovely summer evenings,
when with the deep blue sky above us we lay in good comradeship among
the long grasses by the wood and marveled at the strange fowl that
swept over us and the quaint new creatures which crept from their
burrows to watch us, while above us the boughs of the bushes were heavy
with luscious fruit, and below us strange and lovely flowers peeped at
us from among the herbage; or those long moonlit nights when we lay out
upon the shimmering surface of the great lake and watched with wonder
and awe the huge circles rippling out from the sudden splash of some
fantastic monster; or the greenish gleam, far down in the deep water,
of some strange creature upon the confines of darkness. These are the
scenes which my mind and my pen will dwell upon in every detail at some
future day.

But, you will ask, why these experiences and why this delay, when you
and your comrades should have been occupied day and night in the
devising of some means by which you could return to the outer world?
My answer is, that there was not one of us who was not working for this
end, but that our work had been in vain. One fact we had very speedily
discovered: The Indians would do nothing to help us. In every other
way they were our friends--one might almost say our devoted slaves--but
when it was suggested that they should help us to make and carry a
plank which would bridge the chasm, or when we wished to get from them
thongs of leather or liana to weave ropes which might help us, we were
met by a good-humored, but an invincible, refusal. They would smile,
twinkle their eyes, shake their heads, and there was the end of it.
Even the old chief met us with the same obstinate denial, and it was
only Maretas, the youngster whom we had saved, who looked wistfully at
us and told us by his gestures that he was grieved for our thwarted
wishes. Ever since their crowning triumph with the ape-men they looked
upon us as supermen, who bore victory in the tubes of strange weapons,
and they believed that so long as we remained with them good fortune
would be theirs. A little red-skinned wife and a cave of our own were
freely offered to each of us if we would but forget our own people and
dwell forever upon the plateau. So far all had been kindly, however
far apart our desires might be; but we felt well assured that our
actual plans of a descent must be kept secret, for we had reason to
fear that at the last they might try to hold us by force.

In spite of the danger from dinosaurs (which is not great save at
night, for, as I may have said before, they are mostly nocturnal in
their habits) I have twice in the last three weeks been over to our old
camp in order to see our negro who still kept watch and ward below the
cliff. My eyes strained eagerly across the great plain in the hope of
seeing afar off the help for which we had prayed. But the long
cactus-strewn levels still stretched away, empty and bare, to the
distant line of the cane-brake.

"They will soon come now, Massa Malone. Before another week pass
Indian come back and bring rope and fetch you down." Such was the
cheery cry of our excellent Zambo.

I had one strange experience as I came from this second visit which had
involved my being away for a night from my companions. I was returning
along the well-remembered route, and had reached a spot within a mile
or so of the marsh of the pterodactyls, when I saw an extraordinary
object approaching me. It was a man who walked inside a framework made
of bent canes so that he was enclosed on all sides in a bell-shaped
cage. As I drew nearer I was more amazed still to see that it was Lord
John Roxton. When he saw me he slipped from under his curious
protection and came towards me laughing, and yet, as I thought, with
some confusion in his manner.

"Well, young fellah," said he, "who would have thought of meetin' you
up here?"

"What in the world are you doing?" I asked.

"Visitin' my friends, the pterodactyls," said he.

"But why?"

"Interestin' beasts, don't you think? But unsociable! Nasty rude ways
with strangers, as you may remember. So I rigged this framework which
keeps them from bein' too pressin' in their attentions."

"But what do you want in the swamp?"

He looked at me with a very questioning eye, and I read hesitation in
his face.

"Don't you think other people besides Professors can want to know
things?" he said at last. "I'm studyin' the pretty dears. That's
enough for you."

"No offense," said I.

His good-humor returned and he laughed.

"No offense, young fellah. I'm goin' to get a young devil chick for
Challenger. That's one of my jobs. No, I don't want your company.
I'm safe in this cage, and you are not. So long, and I'll be back in
camp by night-fall."

He turned away and I left him wandering on through the wood with his
extraordinary cage around him.

If Lord John's behavior at this time was strange, that of Challenger
was more so. I may say that he seemed to possess an extraordinary
fascination for the Indian women, and that he always carried a large
spreading palm branch with which he beat them off as if they were
flies, when their attentions became too pressing. To see him walking
like a comic opera Sultan, with this badge of authority in his hand,
his black beard bristling in front of him, his toes pointing at each
step, and a train of wide-eyed Indian girls behind him, clad in their
slender drapery of bark cloth, is one of the most grotesque of all the
pictures which I will carry back with me. As to Summerlee, he was
absorbed in the insect and bird life of the plateau, and spent his
whole time (save that considerable portion which was devoted to abusing
Challenger for not getting us out of our difficulties) in cleaning and
mounting his specimens.

Challenger had been in the habit of walking off by himself every
morning and returning from time to time with looks of portentous
solemnity, as one who bears the full weight of a great enterprise upon
his shoulders. One day, palm branch in hand, and his crowd of adoring
devotees behind him, he led us down to his hidden work-shop and took us
into the secret of his plans.

The place was a small clearing in the center of a palm grove. In this
was one of those boiling mud geysers which I have already described.
Around its edge were scattered a number of leathern thongs cut from
iguanodon hide, and a large collapsed membrane which proved to be the
dried and scraped stomach of one of the great fish lizards from the
lake. This huge sack had been sewn up at one end and only a small
orifice left at the other. Into this opening several bamboo canes had
been inserted and the other ends of these canes were in contact with
conical clay funnels which collected the gas bubbling up through the
mud of the geyser. Soon the flaccid organ began to slowly expand and
show such a tendency to upward movements that Challenger fastened the
cords which held it to the trunks of the surrounding trees. In half an
hour a good-sized gas-bag had been formed, and the jerking and
straining upon the thongs showed that it was capable of considerable
lift. Challenger, like a glad father in the presence of his
first-born, stood smiling and stroking his beard, in silent,
self-satisfied content as he gazed at the creation of his brain. It
was Summerlee who first broke the silence.

"You don't mean us to go up in that thing, Challenger?" said he, in an
acid voice.

"I mean, my dear Summerlee, to give you such a demonstration of its
powers that after seeing it you will, I am sure, have no hesitation in
trusting yourself to it."

"You can put it right out of your head now, at once," said Summerlee
with decision, "nothing on earth would induce me to commit such a
folly. Lord John, I trust that you will not countenance such madness?"

"Dooced ingenious, I call it," said our peer. "I'd like to see how it
works."

"So you shall," said Challenger. "For some days I have exerted my
whole brain force upon the problem of how we shall descend from these
cliffs. We have satisfied ourselves that we cannot climb down and that
there is no tunnel. We are also unable to construct any kind of bridge
which may take us back to the pinnacle from which we came. How then
shall I find a means to convey us? Some little time ago I had remarked
to our young friend here that free hydrogen was evolved from the
geyser. The idea of a balloon naturally followed. I was, I will
admit, somewhat baffled by the difficulty of discovering an envelope to
contain the gas, but the contemplation of the immense entrails of these
reptiles supplied me with a solution to the problem. Behold the
result!"

He put one hand in the front of his ragged jacket and pointed proudly
with the other.

By this time the gas-bag had swollen to a goodly rotundity and was
jerking strongly upon its lashings.

"Midsummer madness!" snorted Summerlee.

Lord John was delighted with the whole idea. "Clever old dear, ain't
he?" he whispered to me, and then louder to Challenger. "What about a
car?"

"The car will be my next care. I have already planned how it is to be
made and attached. Meanwhile I will simply show you how capable my
apparatus is of supporting the weight of each of us."

"All of us, surely?"

"No, it is part of my plan that each in turn shall descend as in a
parachute, and the balloon be drawn back by means which I shall have no
difficulty in perfecting. If it will support the weight of one and let
him gently down, it will have done all that is required of it. I will
now show you its capacity in that direction."

He brought out a lump of basalt of a considerable size, constructed in
the middle so that a cord could be easily attached to it. This cord
was the one which we had brought with us on to the plateau after we had
used it for climbing the pinnacle. It was over a hundred feet long,
and though it was thin it was very strong. He had prepared a sort of
collar of leather with many straps depending from it. This collar was
placed over the dome of the balloon, and the hanging thongs were
gathered together below, so that the pressure of any weight would be
diffused over a considerable surface. Then the lump of basalt was
fastened to the thongs, and the rope was allowed to hang from the end
of it, being passed three times round the Professor's arm.

"I will now," said Challenger, with a smile of pleased anticipation,
"demonstrate the carrying power of my balloon." As he said so he cut
with a knife the various lashings that held it.

Never was our expedition in more imminent danger of complete
annihilation. The inflated membrane shot up with frightful velocity
into the air. In an instant Challenger was pulled off his feet and
dragged after it. I had just time to throw my arms round his ascending
waist when I was myself whipped up into the air. Lord John had me with
a rat-trap grip round the legs, but I felt that he also was coming off
the ground. For a moment I had a vision of four adventurers floating
like a string of sausages over the land that they had explored. But,
happily, there were limits to the strain which the rope would stand,
though none apparently to the lifting powers of this infernal machine.
There was a sharp crack, and we were in a heap upon the ground with
coils of rope all over us. When we were able to stagger to our feet we
saw far off in the deep blue sky one dark spot where the lump of basalt
was speeding upon its way.

"Splendid!" cried the undaunted Challenger, rubbing his injured arm.
"A most thorough and satisfactory demonstration! I could not have
anticipated such a success. Within a week, gentlemen, I promise that a
second balloon will be prepared, and that you can count upon taking in
safety and comfort the first stage of our homeward journey." So far I
have written each of the foregoing events as it occurred. Now I am
rounding off my narrative from the old camp, where Zambo has waited so
long, with all our difficulties and dangers left like a dream behind us
upon the summit of those vast ruddy crags which tower above our heads.
We have descended in safety, though in a most unexpected fashion, and
all is well with us. In six weeks or two months we shall be in London,
and it is possible that this letter may not reach you much earlier than
we do ourselves. Already our hearts yearn and our spirits fly towards
the great mother city which holds so much that is dear to us.

It was on the very evening of our perilous adventure with Challenger's
home-made balloon that the change came in our fortunes. I have said
that the one person from whom we had had some sign of sympathy in our
attempts to get away was the young chief whom we had rescued. He alone
had no desire to hold us against our will in a strange land. He had
told us as much by his expressive language of signs. That evening,
after dusk, he came down to our little camp, handed me (for some reason
he had always shown his attentions to me, perhaps because I was the one
who was nearest his age) a small roll of the bark of a tree, and then
pointing solemnly up at the row of caves above him, he had put his
finger to his lips as a sign of secrecy and had stolen back again to
his people.

I took the slip of bark to the firelight and we examined it together.
It was about a foot square, and on the inner side there was a singular
arrangement of lines, which I here reproduce:

They were neatly done in charcoal upon the white surface, and looked to
me at first sight like some sort of rough musical score.

"Whatever it is, I can swear that it is of importance to us," said I.
"I could read that on his face as he gave it."

"Unless we have come upon a primitive practical joker," Summerlee
suggested, "which I should think would be one of the most elementary
developments of man."

"It is clearly some sort of script," said Challenger.

"Looks like a guinea puzzle competition," remarked Lord John, craning
his neck to have a look at it. Then suddenly he stretched out his hand
and seized the puzzle.

"By George!" he cried, "I believe I've got it. The boy guessed right
the very first time. See here! How many marks are on that paper?
Eighteen. Well, if you come to think of it there are eighteen cave
openings on the hill-side above us."

"He pointed up to the caves when he gave it to me," said I.

"Well, that settles it. This is a chart of the caves. What! Eighteen
of them all in a row, some short, some deep, some branching, same as we
saw them. It's a map, and here's a cross on it. What's the cross for?
It is placed to mark one that is much deeper than the others."

"One that goes through," I cried.

"I believe our young friend has read the riddle," said Challenger. "If
the cave does not go through I do not understand why this person, who
has every reason to mean us well, should have drawn our attention to
it. But if it does go through and comes out at the corresponding point
on the other side, we should not have more than a hundred feet to
descend."

"A hundred feet!" grumbled Summerlee.

"Well, our rope is still more than a hundred feet long," I cried.
"Surely we could get down."

"How about the Indians in the cave?" Summerlee objected.

"There are no Indians in any of the caves above our heads," said I.
"They are all used as barns and store-houses. Why should we not go up
now at once and spy out the land?"

There is a dry bituminous wood upon the plateau--a species of
araucaria, according to our botanist--which is always used by the
Indians for torches. Each of us picked up a faggot of this, and we
made our way up weed-covered steps to the particular cave which was
marked in the drawing. It was, as I had said, empty, save for a great
number of enormous bats, which flapped round our heads as we advanced
into it. As we had no desire to draw the attention of the Indians to
our proceedings, we stumbled along in the dark until we had gone round
several curves and penetrated a considerable distance into the cavern.
Then, at last, we lit our torches. It was a beautiful dry tunnel with
smooth gray walls covered with native symbols, a curved roof which
arched over our heads, and white glistening sand beneath our feet. We
hurried eagerly along it until, with a deep groan of bitter
disappointment, we were brought to a halt. A sheer wall of rock had
appeared before us, with no chink through which a mouse could have
slipped. There was no escape for us there.

We stood with bitter hearts staring at this unexpected obstacle. It
was not the result of any convulsion, as in the case of the ascending
tunnel. The end wall was exactly like the side ones. It was, and had
always been, a cul-de-sac.

"Never mind, my friends," said the indomitable Challenger. "You have
still my firm promise of a balloon."

Summerlee groaned.

"Can we be in the wrong cave?" I suggested.

"No use, young fellah," said Lord John, with his finger on the chart.
"Seventeen from the right and second from the left. This is the cave
sure enough."

I looked at the mark to which his finger pointed, and I gave a sudden
cry of joy.

"I believe I have it! Follow me! Follow me!"

I hurried back along the way we had come, my torch in my hand. "Here,"
said I, pointing to some matches upon the ground, "is where we lit up."

"Exactly."

"Well, it is marked as a forked cave, and in the darkness we passed the
fork before the torches were lit. On the right side as we go out we
should find the longer arm."

It was as I had said. We had not gone thirty yards before a great
black opening loomed in the wall. We turned into it to find that we
were in a much larger passage than before. Along it we hurried in
breathless impatience for many hundreds of yards. Then, suddenly, in
the black darkness of the arch in front of us we saw a gleam of dark
red light. We stared in amazement. A sheet of steady flame seemed to
cross the passage and to bar our way. We hastened towards it. No
sound, no heat, no movement came from it, but still the great luminous
curtain glowed before us, silvering all the cave and turning the sand
to powdered jewels, until as we drew closer it discovered a circular
edge.

"The moon, by George!" cried Lord John. "We are through, boys! We are
through!"

It was indeed the full moon which shone straight down the aperture
which opened upon the cliffs. It was a small rift, not larger than a
window, but it was enough for all our purposes. As we craned our necks
through it we could see that the descent was not a very difficult one,
and that the level ground was no very great way below us. It was no
wonder that from below we had not observed the place, as the cliffs
curved overhead and an ascent at the spot would have seemed so
impossible as to discourage close inspection. We satisfied ourselves
that with the help of our rope we could find our way down, and then
returned, rejoicing, to our camp to make our preparations for the next
evening.

What we did we had to do quickly and secretly, since even at this last
hour the Indians might hold us back. Our stores we would leave behind
us, save only our guns and cartridges. But Challenger had some
unwieldy stuff which he ardently desired to take with him, and one
particular package, of which I may not speak, which gave us more labor
than any. Slowly the day passed, but when the darkness fell we were
ready for our departure. With much labor we got our things up the
steps, and then, looking back, took one last long survey of that
strange land, soon I fear to be vulgarized, the prey of hunter and
prospector, but to each of us a dreamland of glamour and romance, a
land where we had dared much, suffered much, and learned much--OUR
land, as we shall ever fondly call it. Along upon our left the
neighboring caves each threw out its ruddy cheery firelight into the
gloom. From the slope below us rose the voices of the Indians as they
laughed and sang. Beyond was the long sweep of the woods, and in the
center, shimmering vaguely through the gloom, was the great lake, the
mother of strange monsters. Even as we looked a high whickering cry,
the call of some weird animal, rang clear out of the darkness. It was
the very voice of Maple White Land bidding us good-bye. We turned and
plunged into the cave which led to home.

Two hours later, we, our packages, and all we owned, were at the foot
of the cliff. Save for Challenger's luggage we had never a difficulty.
Leaving it all where we descended, we started at once for Zambo's camp.
In the early morning we approached it, but only to find, to our
amazement, not one fire but a dozen upon the plain. The rescue party
had arrived. There were twenty Indians from the river, with stakes,
ropes, and all that could be useful for bridging the chasm. At least
we shall have no difficulty now in carrying our packages, when
to-morrow we begin to make our way back to the Amazon.

And so, in humble and thankful mood, I close this account. Our eyes
have seen great wonders and our souls are chastened by what we have
endured. Each is in his own way a better and deeper man. It may be
that when we reach Para we shall stop to refit. If we do, this letter
will be a mail ahead. If not, it will reach London on the very day
that I do. In either case, my dear Mr. McArdle, I hope very soon to
shake you by the hand.

CHAPTER XVI

"A Procession! A Procession!"

I should wish to place upon record here our gratitude to all our
friends upon the Amazon for the very great kindness and hospitality
which was shown to us upon our return journey. Very particularly would
I thank Senhor Penalosa and other officials of the Brazilian Government
for the special arrangements by which we were helped upon our way, and
Senhor Pereira of Para, to whose forethought we owe the complete outfit
for a decent appearance in the civilized world which we found ready for
us at that town. It seemed a poor return for all the courtesy which we
encountered that we should deceive our hosts and benefactors, but under
the circumstances we had really no alternative, and I hereby tell them
that they will only waste their time and their money if they attempt to
follow upon our traces. Even the names have been altered in our
accounts, and I am very sure that no one, from the most careful study
of them, could come within a thousand miles of our unknown land.

The excitement which had been caused through those parts of South
America which we had to traverse was imagined by us to be purely local,
and I can assure our friends in England that we had no notion of the
uproar which the mere rumor of our experiences had caused through
Europe. It was not until the Ivernia was within five hundred miles of
Southampton that the wireless messages from paper after paper and
agency after agency, offering huge prices for a short return message as
to our actual results, showed us how strained was the attention not
only of the scientific world but of the general public. It was agreed
among us, however, that no definite statement should be given to the
Press until we had met the members of the Zoological Institute, since
as delegates it was our clear duty to give our first report to the body
from which we had received our commission of investigation. Thus,
although we found Southampton full of Pressmen, we absolutely refused
to give any information, which had the natural effect of focussing
public attention upon the meeting which was advertised for the evening
of November 7th. For this gathering, the Zoological Hall which had
been the scene of the inception of our task was found to be far too
small, and it was only in the Queen's Hall in Regent Street that
accommodation could be found. It is now common knowledge the promoters
might have ventured upon the Albert Hall and still found their space
too scanty.

It was for the second evening after our arrival that the great meeting
had been fixed. For the first, we had each, no doubt, our own pressing
personal affairs to absorb us. Of mine I cannot yet speak. It may be
that as it stands further from me I may think of it, and even speak of
it, with less emotion. I have shown the reader in the beginning of
this narrative where lay the springs of my action. It is but right,
perhaps, that I should carry on the tale and show also the results.
And yet the day may come when I would not have it otherwise. At least
I have been driven forth to take part in a wondrous adventure, and I
cannot but be thankful to the force that drove me.

And now I turn to the last supreme eventful moment of our adventure.
As I was racking my brain as to how I should best describe it, my eyes
fell upon the issue of my own Journal for the morning of the 8th of
November with the full and excellent account of my friend and
fellow-reporter Macdona. What can I do better than transcribe his
narrative--head-lines and all? I admit that the paper was exuberant in
the matter, out of compliment to its own enterprise in sending a
correspondent, but the other great dailies were hardly less full in
their account. Thus, then, friend Mac in his report:

THE NEW WORLD
GREAT MEETING AT THE QUEEN'S HALL
SCENES OF UPROAR
EXTRAORDINARY INCIDENT
WHAT WAS IT?
NOCTURNAL RIOT IN REGENT STREET
(Special)

"The much-discussed meeting of the Zoological Institute, convened to
hear the report of the Committee of Investigation sent out last year to
South America to test the assertions made by Professor Challenger as to
the continued existence of prehistoric life upon that Continent, was
held last night in the greater Queen's Hall, and it is safe to say that
it is likely to be a red letter date in the history of Science, for the
proceedings were of so remarkable and sensational a character that no
one present is ever likely to forget them." (Oh, brother scribe
Macdona, what a monstrous opening sentence!) "The tickets were
theoretically confined to members and their friends, but the latter is
an elastic term, and long before eight o'clock, the hour fixed for the
commencement of the proceedings, all parts of the Great Hall were
tightly packed. The general public, however, which most unreasonably
entertained a grievance at having been excluded, stormed the doors at a
quarter to eight, after a prolonged melee in which several people were
injured, including Inspector Scoble of H. Division, whose leg was
unfortunately broken. After this unwarrantable invasion, which not
only filled every passage, but even intruded upon the space set apart
for the Press, it is estimated that nearly five thousand people awaited
the arrival of the travelers. When they eventually appeared, they took
their places in the front of a platform which already contained all the
leading scientific men, not only of this country, but of France and of
Germany. Sweden was also represented, in the person of Professor
Sergius, the famous Zoologist of the University of Upsala. The
entrance of the four heroes of the occasion was the signal for a
remarkable demonstration of welcome, the whole audience rising and
cheering for some minutes. An acute observer might, however, have
detected some signs of dissent amid the applause, and gathered that the
proceedings were likely to become more lively than harmonious. It may
safely be prophesied, however, that no one could have foreseen the
extraordinary turn which they were actually to take.

"Of the appearance of the four wanderers little need be said, since
their photographs have for some time been appearing in all the papers.
They bear few traces of the hardships which they are said to have
undergone. Professor Challenger's beard may be more shaggy, Professor
Summerlee's features more ascetic, Lord John Roxton's figure more
gaunt, and all three may be burned to a darker tint than when they left
our shores, but each appeared to be in most excellent health. As to
our own representative, the well-known athlete and international Rugby
football player, E. D. Malone, he looks trained to a hair, and as he
surveyed the crowd a smile of good-humored contentment pervaded his
honest but homely face." (All right, Mac, wait till I get you alone!)

"When quiet had been restored and the audience resumed their seats
after the ovation which they had given to the travelers, the chairman,
the Duke of Durham, addressed the meeting. 'He would not,' he said,
'stand for more than a moment between that vast assembly and the treat
which lay before them. It was not for him to anticipate what Professor
Summerlee, who was the spokesman of the committee, had to say to them,
but it was common rumor that their expedition had been crowned by
extraordinary success.' (Applause.) 'Apparently the age of romance
was not dead, and there was common ground upon which the wildest
imaginings of the novelist could meet the actual scientific
investigations of the searcher for truth. He would only add, before he
sat down, that he rejoiced--and all of them would rejoice--that these
gentlemen had returned safe and sound from their difficult and
dangerous task, for it cannot be denied that any disaster to such an
expedition would have inflicted a well-nigh irreparable loss to the
cause of Zoological science.' (Great applause, in which Professor
Challenger was observed to join.)

"Professor Summerlee's rising was the signal for another extraordinary
outbreak of enthusiasm, which broke out again at intervals throughout
his address. That address will not be given in extenso in these
columns, for the reason that a full account of the whole adventures of
the expedition is being published as a supplement from the pen of our
own special correspondent. Some general indications will therefore
suffice. Having described the genesis of their journey, and paid a
handsome tribute to his friend Professor Challenger, coupled with an
apology for the incredulity with which his assertions, now fully
vindicated, had been received, he gave the actual course of their
journey, carefully withholding such information as would aid the public
in any attempt to locate this remarkable plateau. Having described, in
general terms, their course from the main river up to the time that
they actually reached the base of the cliffs, he enthralled his hearers
by his account of the difficulties encountered by the expedition in
their repeated attempts to mount them, and finally described how they
succeeded in their desperate endeavors, which cost the lives of their
two devoted half-breed servants." (This amazing reading of the affair
was the result of Summerlee's endeavors to avoid raising any
questionable matter at the meeting.)

"Having conducted his audience in fancy to the summit, and marooned
them there by reason of the fall of their bridge, the Professor
proceeded to describe both the horrors and the attractions of that
remarkable land. Of personal adventures he said little, but laid
stress upon the rich harvest reaped by Science in the observations of
the wonderful beast, bird, insect, and plant life of the plateau.
Peculiarly rich in the coleoptera and in the lepidoptera, forty-six new
species of the one and ninety-four of the other had been secured in the
course of a few weeks. It was, however, in the larger animals, and
especially in the larger animals supposed to have been long extinct,
that the interest of the public was naturally centered. Of these he
was able to give a goodly list, but had little doubt that it would be
largely extended when the place had been more thoroughly investigated.
He and his companions had seen at least a dozen creatures, most of them
at a distance, which corresponded with nothing at present known to
Science. These would in time be duly classified and examined. He
instanced a snake, the cast skin of which, deep purple in color, was
fifty-one feet in length, and mentioned a white creature, supposed to
be mammalian, which gave forth well-marked phosphorescence in the
darkness; also a large black moth, the bite of which was supposed by
the Indians to be highly poisonous. Setting aside these entirely new
forms of life, the plateau was very rich in known prehistoric forms,
dating back in some cases to early Jurassic times. Among these he
mentioned the gigantic and grotesque stegosaurus, seen once by Mr.
Malone at a drinking-place by the lake, and drawn in the sketch-book of
that adventurous American who had first penetrated this unknown world.
He described also the iguanodon and the pterodactyl--two of the first
of the wonders which they had encountered. He then thrilled the
assembly by some account of the terrible carnivorous dinosaurs, which
had on more than one occasion pursued members of the party, and which
were the most formidable of all the creatures which they had
encountered. Thence he passed to the huge and ferocious bird, the
phororachus, and to the great elk which still roams upon this upland.
It was not, however, until he sketched the mysteries of the central
lake that the full interest and enthusiasm of the audience were
aroused. One had to pinch oneself to be sure that one was awake as one
heard this sane and practical Professor in cold measured tones
describing the monstrous three-eyed fish-lizards and the huge
water-snakes which inhabit this enchanted sheet of water. Next he
touched upon the Indians, and upon the extraordinary colony of
anthropoid apes, which might be looked upon as an advance upon the
pithecanthropus of Java, and as coming therefore nearer than any known
form to that hypothetical creation, the missing link. Finally he
described, amongst some merriment, the ingenious but highly dangerous
aeronautic invention of Professor Challenger, and wound up a most
memorable address by an account of the methods by which the committee
did at last find their way back to civilization.

"It had been hoped that the proceedings would end there, and that a
vote of thanks and congratulation, moved by Professor Sergius, of
Upsala University, would be duly seconded and carried; but it was soon
evident that the course of events was not destined to flow so smoothly.
Symptoms of opposition had been evident from time to time during the
evening, and now Dr. James Illingworth, of Edinburgh, rose in the
center of the hall. Dr. Illingworth asked whether an amendment should
not be taken before a resolution.

"THE CHAIRMAN: 'Yes, sir, if there must be an amendment.'

"DR. ILLINGWORTH: 'Your Grace, there must be an amendment.'

"THE CHAIRMAN: 'Then let us take it at once.'

"PROFESSOR SUMMERLEE (springing to his feet): 'Might I explain, your
Grace, that this man is my personal enemy ever since our controversy in
the Quarterly Journal of Science as to the true nature of Bathybius?'

"THE CHAIRMAN: 'I fear I cannot go into personal matters. Proceed.'

"Dr. Illingworth was imperfectly heard in part of his remarks on
account of the strenuous opposition of the friends of the explorers.
Some attempts were also made to pull him down. Being a man of enormous
physique, however, and possessed of a very powerful voice, he dominated
the tumult and succeeded in finishing his speech. It was clear, from
the moment of his rising, that he had a number of friends and
sympathizers in the hall, though they formed a minority in the
audience. The attitude of the greater part of the public might be
described as one of attentive neutrality.

"Dr. Illingworth began his remarks by expressing his high appreciation
of the scientific work both of Professor Challenger and of Professor
Summerlee. He much regretted that any personal bias should have been
read into his remarks, which were entirely dictated by his desire for
scientific truth. His position, in fact, was substantially the same as
that taken up by Professor Summerlee at the last meeting. At that last
meeting Professor Challenger had made certain assertions which had been
queried by his colleague. Now this colleague came forward himself with
the same assertions and expected them to remain unquestioned. Was this
reasonable? ('Yes,' 'No,' and prolonged interruption, during which
Professor Challenger was heard from the Press box to ask leave from the
chairman to put Dr. Illingworth into the street.) A year ago one man
said certain things. Now four men said other and more startling ones.
Was this to constitute a final proof where the matters in question were
of the most revolutionary and incredible character? There had been
recent examples of travelers arriving from the unknown with certain
tales which had been too readily accepted. Was the London Zoological
Institute to place itself in this position? He admitted that the
members of the committee were men of character. But human nature was
very complex. Even Professors might be misled by the desire for
notoriety. Like moths, we all love best to flutter in the light.
Heavy-game shots liked to be in a position to cap the tales of their
rivals, and journalists were not averse from sensational coups, even
when imagination had to aid fact in the process. Each member of the
committee had his own motive for making the most of his results.
('Shame! shame!') He had no desire to be offensive. ('You are!' and
interruption.) The corroboration of these wondrous tales was really of
the most slender description. What did it amount to? Some
photographs. {Was it possible that in this age of ingenious
manipulation photographs could be accepted as evidence?} What more?
We have a story of a flight and a descent by ropes which precluded the
production of larger specimens. It was ingenious, but not convincing.
It was understood that Lord John Roxton claimed to have the skull of a
phororachus. He could only say that he would like to see that skull.

"LORD JOHN ROXTON: 'Is this fellow calling me a liar?' (Uproar.)

"THE CHAIRMAN: 'Order! order! Dr. Illingworth, I must direct you to
bring your remarks to a conclusion and to move your amendment.'

"DR. ILLINGWORTH: 'Your Grace, I have more to say, but I bow to your
ruling. I move, then, that, while Professor Summerlee be thanked for
his interesting address, the whole matter shall be regarded as
'non-proven,' and shall be referred back to a larger, and possibly more
reliable Committee of Investigation.'

"It is difficult to describe the confusion caused by this amendment. A
large section of the audience expressed their indignation at such a
slur upon the travelers by noisy shouts of dissent and cries of, 'Don't
put it!' 'Withdraw!' 'Turn him out!' On the other hand, the
malcontents--and it cannot be denied that they were fairly
numerous--cheered for the amendment, with cries of 'Order!' 'Chair!'
and 'Fair play!' A scuffle broke out in the back benches, and blows
were freely exchanged among the medical students who crowded that part
of the hall. It was only the moderating influence of the presence of
large numbers of ladies which prevented an absolute riot. Suddenly,
however, there was a pause, a hush, and then complete silence.
Professor Challenger was on his feet. His appearance and manner are
peculiarly arresting, and as he raised his hand for order the whole
audience settled down expectantly to give him a hearing.

"'It will be within the recollection of many present,' said Professor
Challenger, 'that similar foolish and unmannerly scenes marked the last
meeting at which I have been able to address them. On that occasion
Professor Summerlee was the chief offender, and though he is now
chastened and contrite, the matter could not be entirely forgotten. I
have heard to-night similar, but even more offensive, sentiments from
the person who has just sat down, and though it is a conscious effort
of self-effacement to come down to that person's mental level, I will
endeavor to do so, in order to allay any reasonable doubt which could
possibly exist in the minds of anyone.' (Laughter and interruption.)
'I need not remind this audience that, though Professor Summerlee, as
the head of the Committee of Investigation, has been put up to speak
to-night, still it is I who am the real prime mover in this business,
and that it is mainly to me that any successful result must be
ascribed. I have safely conducted these three gentlemen to the spot
mentioned, and I have, as you have heard, convinced them of the
accuracy of my previous account. We had hoped that we should find upon
our return that no one was so dense as to dispute our joint
conclusions. Warned, however, by my previous experience, I have not
come without such proofs as may convince a reasonable man. As
explained by Professor Summerlee, our cameras have been tampered with
by the ape-men when they ransacked our camp, and most of our negatives
ruined.' (Jeers, laughter, and 'Tell us another!' from the back.) 'I
have mentioned the ape-men, and I cannot forbear from saying that some
of the sounds which now meet my ears bring back most vividly to my
recollection my experiences with those interesting creatures.'
(Laughter.) 'In spite of the destruction of so many invaluable
negatives, there still remains in our collection a certain number of
corroborative photographs showing the conditions of life upon the
plateau. Did they accuse them of having forged these photographs?' (A
voice, 'Yes,' and considerable interruption which ended in several men
being put out of the hall.) 'The negatives were open to the inspection
of experts. But what other evidence had they? Under the conditions of
their escape it was naturally impossible to bring a large amount of
baggage, but they had rescued Professor Summerlee's collections of
butterflies and beetles, containing many new species. Was this not
evidence?' (Several voices, 'No.') 'Who said no?'

"DR. ILLINGWORTH (rising): 'Our point is that such a collection might
have been made in other places than a prehistoric plateau.' (Applause.)

"PROFESSOR CHALLENGER: 'No doubt, sir, we have to bow to your
scientific authority, although I must admit that the name is
unfamiliar. Passing, then, both the photographs and the entomological
collection, I come to the varied and accurate information which we
bring with us upon points which have never before been elucidated. For
example, upon the domestic habits of the pterodactyl--'(A voice:
'Bosh,' and uproar)--'I say, that upon the domestic habits of the
pterodactyl we can throw a flood of light. I can exhibit to you from
my portfolio a picture of that creature taken from life which would
convince you----'

"DR. ILLINGWORTH: 'No picture could convince us of anything.'

"PROFESSOR CHALLENGER: 'You would require to see the thing itself?'

"DR. ILLINGWORTH: 'Undoubtedly.'

"PROFESSOR CHALLENGER: 'And you would accept that?'

"DR. ILLINGWORTH (laughing): 'Beyond a doubt.'

"It was at this point that the sensation of the evening arose--a
sensation so dramatic that it can never have been paralleled in the
history of scientific gatherings. Professor Challenger raised his hand
in the air as a signal, and at once our colleague, Mr. E. D. Malone,
was observed to rise and to make his way to the back of the platform.
An instant later he re-appeared in company of a gigantic negro, the two
of them bearing between them a large square packing-case. It was
evidently of great weight, and was slowly carried forward and placed in
front of the Professor's chair. All sound had hushed in the audience
and everyone was absorbed in the spectacle before them. Professor
Challenger drew off the top of the case, which formed a sliding lid.
Peering down into the box he snapped his fingers several times and was
heard from the Press seat to say, 'Come, then, pretty, pretty!' in a
coaxing voice. An instant later, with a scratching, rattling sound, a
most horrible and loathsome creature appeared from below and perched
itself upon the side of the case. Even the unexpected fall of the Duke
of Durham into the orchestra, which occurred at this moment, could not
distract the petrified attention of the vast audience. The face of the
creature was like the wildest gargoyle that the imagination of a mad
medieval builder could have conceived. It was malicious, horrible,
with two small red eyes as bright as points of burning coal. Its long,
savage mouth, which was held half-open, was full of a double row of
shark-like teeth. Its shoulders were humped, and round them were
draped what appeared to be a faded gray shawl. It was the devil of our
childhood in person. There was a turmoil in the audience--someone
screamed, two ladies in the front row fell senseless from their chairs,
and there was a general movement upon the platform to follow their
chairman into the orchestra. For a moment there was danger of a
general panic. Professor Challenger threw up his hands to still the
commotion, but the movement alarmed the creature beside him. Its
strange shawl suddenly unfurled, spread, and fluttered as a pair of
leathery wings. Its owner grabbed at its legs, but too late to hold
it. It had sprung from the perch and was circling slowly round the
Queen's Hall with a dry, leathery flapping of its ten-foot wings, while
a putrid and insidious odor pervaded the room. The cries of the people
in the galleries, who were alarmed at the near approach of those
glowing eyes and that murderous beak, excited the creature to a frenzy.
Faster and faster it flew, beating against walls and chandeliers in a
blind frenzy of alarm. 'The window! For heaven's sake shut that
window!' roared the Professor from the platform, dancing and wringing
his hands in an agony of apprehension. Alas, his warning was too late!
In a moment the creature, beating and bumping along the wall like a
huge moth within a gas-shade, came upon the opening, squeezed its
hideous bulk through it, and was gone. Professor Challenger fell back
into his chair with his face buried in his hands, while the audience
gave one long, deep sigh of relief as they realized that the incident
was over.

"Then--oh! how shall one describe what took place then--when the full
exuberance of the majority and the full reaction of the minority united
to make one great wave of enthusiasm, which rolled from the back of the
hall, gathering volume as it came, swept over the orchestra, submerged
the platform, and carried the four heroes away upon its crest?" (Good
for you, Mac!) "If the audience had done less than justice, surely it
made ample amends. Every one was on his feet. Every one was moving,
shouting, gesticulating. A dense crowd of cheering men were round the
four travelers. 'Up with them! up with them!' cried a hundred voices.
In a moment four figures shot up above the crowd. In vain they strove
to break loose. They were held in their lofty places of honor. It
would have been hard to let them down if it had been wished, so dense
was the crowd around them. 'Regent Street! Regent Street!' sounded
the voices. There was a swirl in the packed multitude, and a slow
current, bearing the four upon their shoulders, made for the door. Out
in the street the scene was extraordinary. An assemblage of not less
than a hundred thousand people was waiting. The close-packed throng
extended from the other side of the Langham Hotel to Oxford Circus. A
roar of acclamation greeted the four adventurers as they appeared, high
above the heads of the people, under the vivid electric lamps outside
the hall. 'A procession! A procession!' was the cry. In a dense
phalanx, blocking the streets from side to side, the crowd set forth,
taking the route of Regent Street, Pall Mall, St. James's Street, and
Piccadilly. The whole central traffic of London was held up, and many
collisions were reported between the demonstrators upon the one side
and the police and taxi-cabmen upon the other. Finally, it was not
until after midnight that the four travelers were released at the
entrance to Lord John Roxton's chambers in the Albany, and that the
exuberant crowd, having sung 'They are Jolly Good Fellows' in chorus,
concluded their program with 'God Save the King.' So ended one of the
most remarkable evenings that London has seen for a considerable time."

So far my friend Macdona; and it may be taken as a fairly accurate, if
florid, account of the proceedings. As to the main incident, it was a
bewildering surprise to the audience, but not, I need hardly say, to
us. The reader will remember how I met Lord John Roxton upon the very
occasion when, in his protective crinoline, he had gone to bring the
"Devil's chick" as he called it, for Professor Challenger. I have
hinted also at the trouble which the Professor's baggage gave us when
we left the plateau, and had I described our voyage I might have said a
good deal of the worry we had to coax with putrid fish the appetite of
our filthy companion. If I have not said much about it before, it was,
of course, that the Professor's earnest desire was that no possible
rumor of the unanswerable argument which we carried should be allowed
to leak out until the moment came when his enemies were to be confuted.

One word as to the fate of the London pterodactyl. Nothing can be said
to be certain upon this point. There is the evidence of two frightened
women that it perched upon the roof of the Queen's Hall and remained
there like a diabolical statue for some hours. The next day it came
out in the evening papers that Private Miles, of the Coldstream Guards,
on duty outside Marlborough House, had deserted his post without leave,
and was therefore courtmartialed. Private Miles' account, that he
dropped his rifle and took to his heels down the Mall because on
looking up he had suddenly seen the devil between him and the moon, was
not accepted by the Court, and yet it may have a direct bearing upon
the point at issue. The only other evidence which I can adduce is from
the log of the SS. Friesland, a Dutch-American liner, which asserts
that at nine next morning, Start Point being at the time ten miles upon
their starboard quarter, they were passed by something between a flying
goat and a monstrous bat, which was heading at a prodigious pace south
and west. If its homing instinct led it upon the right line, there can
be no doubt that somewhere out in the wastes of the Atlantic the last
European pterodactyl found its end.

And Gladys--oh, my Gladys!--Gladys of the mystic lake, now to be
re-named the Central, for never shall she have immortality through me.
Did I not always see some hard fiber in her nature? Did I not, even at
the time when I was proud to obey her behest, feel that it was surely a
poor love which could drive a lover to his death or the danger of it?
Did I not, in my truest thoughts, always recurring and always
dismissed, see past the beauty of the face, and, peering into the soul,
discern the twin shadows of selfishness and of fickleness glooming at
the back of it? Did she love the heroic and the spectacular for its
own noble sake, or was it for the glory which might, without effort or
sacrifice, be reflected upon herself? Or are these thoughts the vain
wisdom which comes after the event? It was the shock of my life. For
a moment it had turned me to a cynic. But already, as I write, a week
has passed, and we have had our momentous interview with Lord John
Roxton and--well, perhaps things might be worse.

Let me tell it in a few words. No letter or telegram had come to me at
Southampton, and I reached the little villa at Streatham about ten
o'clock that night in a fever of alarm. Was she dead or alive? Where
were all my nightly dreams of the open arms, the smiling face, the
words of praise for her man who had risked his life to humor her whim?
Already I was down from the high peaks and standing flat-footed upon
earth. Yet some good reasons given might still lift me to the clouds
once more. I rushed down the garden path, hammered at the door, heard
the voice of Gladys within, pushed past the staring maid, and strode
into the sitting-room. She was seated in a low settee under the shaded
standard lamp by the piano. In three steps I was across the room and
had both her hands in mine.

"Gladys!" I cried, "Gladys!"

She looked up with amazement in her face. She was altered in some
subtle way. The expression of her eyes, the hard upward stare, the set
of the lips, was new to me. She drew back her hands.

"What do you mean?" she said.

"Gladys!" I cried. "What is the matter? You are my Gladys, are you
not--little Gladys Hungerton?"

"No," said she, "I am Gladys Potts. Let me introduce you to my
husband."

How absurd life is! I found myself mechanically bowing and shaking
hands with a little ginger-haired man who was coiled up in the deep
arm-chair which had once been sacred to my own use. We bobbed and
grinned in front of each other.

"Father lets us stay here. We are getting our house ready," said
Gladys.

"Oh, yes," said I.

"You didn't get my letter at Para, then?"

"No, I got no letter."

"Oh, what a pity! It would have made all clear."

"It is quite clear," said I.

"I've told William all about you," said she. "We have no secrets. I
am so sorry about it. But it couldn't have been so very deep, could
it, if you could go off to the other end of the world and leave me here
alone. You're not crabby, are you?"

"No, no, not at all. I think I'll go."

"Have some refreshment," said the little man, and he added, in a
confidential way, "It's always like this, ain't it? And must be unless
you had polygamy, only the other way round; you understand." He laughed
like an idiot, while I made for the door.

I was through it, when a sudden fantastic impulse came upon me, and I
went back to my successful rival, who looked nervously at the electric
push.

"Will you answer a question?" I asked.

"Well, within reason," said he.

"How did you do it? Have you searched for hidden treasure, or
discovered a pole, or done time on a pirate, or flown the Channel, or
what? Where is the glamour of romance? How did you get it?"

He stared at me with a hopeless expression upon his vacuous,
good-natured, scrubby little face.

"Don't you think all this is a little too personal?" he said.

"Well, just one question," I cried. "What are you? What is your
profession?"

"I am a solicitor's clerk," said he. "Second man at Johnson and
Merivale's, 41 Chancery Lane."

"Good-night!" said I, and vanished, like all disconsolate and
broken-hearted heroes, into the darkness, with grief and rage and
laughter all simmering within me like a boiling pot.

One more little scene, and I have done. Last night we all supped at
Lord John Roxton's rooms, and sitting together afterwards we smoked in
good comradeship and talked our adventures over. It was strange under
these altered surroundings to see the old, well-known faces and
figures. There was Challenger, with his smile of condescension, his
drooping eyelids, his intolerant eyes, his aggressive beard, his huge
chest, swelling and puffing as he laid down the law to Summerlee. And
Summerlee, too, there he was with his short briar between his thin
moustache and his gray goat's-beard, his worn face protruded in eager
debate as he queried all Challenger's propositions. Finally, there was
our host, with his rugged, eagle face, and his cold, blue, glacier eyes
with always a shimmer of devilment and of humor down in the depths of
them. Such is the last picture of them that I have carried away.

It was after supper, in his own sanctum--the room of the pink radiance
and the innumerable trophies--that Lord John Roxton had something to
say to us. From a cupboard he had brought an old cigar-box, and this
he laid before him on the table.

"There's one thing," said he, "that maybe I should have spoken about
before this, but I wanted to know a little more clearly where I was.
No use to raise hopes and let them down again. But it's facts, not
hopes, with us now. You may remember that day we found the pterodactyl
rookery in the swamp--what? Well, somethin' in the lie of the land
took my notice. Perhaps it has escaped you, so I will tell you. It
was a volcanic vent full of blue clay." The Professors nodded.

"Well, now, in the whole world I've only had to do with one place that
was a volcanic vent of blue clay. That was the great De Beers Diamond
Mine of Kimberley--what? So you see I got diamonds into my head. I
rigged up a contraption to hold off those stinking beasts, and I spent
a happy day there with a spud. This is what I got."

He opened his cigar-box, and tilting it over he poured about twenty or
thirty rough stones, varying from the size of beans to that of
chestnuts, on the table.

"Perhaps you think I should have told you then. Well, so I should,
only I know there are a lot of traps for the unwary, and that stones
may be of any size and yet of little value where color and consistency
are clean off. Therefore, I brought them back, and on the first day at
home I took one round to Spink's, and asked him to have it roughly cut
and valued."

He took a pill-box from his pocket, and spilled out of it a beautiful
glittering diamond, one of the finest stones that I have ever seen.

"There's the result," said he. "He prices the lot at a minimum of two
hundred thousand pounds. Of course it is fair shares between us. I
won't hear of anythin' else. Well, Challenger, what will you do with
your fifty thousand?"

"If you really persist in your generous view," said the Professor, "I
should found a private museum, which has long been one of my dreams."

"And you, Summerlee?"

"I would retire from teaching, and so find time for my final
classification of the chalk fossils."

"I'll use my own," said Lord John Roxton, "in fitting a well-formed
expedition and having another look at the dear old plateau. As to you,
young fellah, you, of course, will spend yours in gettin' married."

"Not just yet," said I, with a rueful smile. "I think, if you will
have me, that I would rather go with you."

Lord Roxton said nothing, but a brown hand was stretched out to me
across the table.